    
35
2
Revisionary Analysis without
Meaning Change (Or, Could
Women Be Analytically
Oppressed )
Derek Ball
There are a number of conceptions of philosophical analysis, but a common thread in
most of these conceptions is that the aim of analysis is descriptive: we take our words
and concepts as they are, and try to draw some philosophical conclusion from them.
Frank Jackson captures this picture of philosophy when he writes,
What we are seeking to address is whether free action according to our ordinary conception, or
something suitably close to our ordinary conception, exists and is compatible with determinism,
and whether intentional states according to our ordinary conception, or something suitably
close to it, will survive what cognitive science reveals about the operations of our brains.
(1998: 31; original emphasis)
Analysis is important, on Jackson’s view, precisely because it ensures that we do not
stray too far from ordinary thought and linguistic usage. The upshot is much in the
spirit of Wittgenstein: “Philosophy may in no way interfere with the actual use of
language; it can in the end only describe it. [ . . . ] It leaves everything as it is” (1953:
section 124).¹
Other philosophers—across a range of subdisciplines—have advocated a critical
and constructive philosophical project: we should not simply take our words and
concepts as they come, but should aim to improve them if we can. Among the most
provocative of such attempts is Sally Haslanger’s social constructivist analysis of race
and gender terms. Haslanger proposes the following analysis of ‘woman’:
¹ Jackson himself would not endorse Wittgenstein’s claim in full generality; he thinks that it is
sometimes appropriate to replace one concept with another that can better do the relevant “theoretical
job” (1998: 44). The point nonetheless stands that on Jackson’s view, analysis is important precisely
because it ensures continuity with ordinary thought and linguistic usage.
    
  36
S is a woman iff
(i) S is regularly and for the most part observed or imagined to have certain
bodily features presumed to be evidence of a female’s biological role in
reproduction;
(ii) that S has these features marks S within the dominant ideology of S’s society
as someone who ought to occupy certain kinds of social position that are in fact
subordinate (and so motivates and justifies S’s occupying such a position); and
(iii) the fact that S satisfies (I) and (ii) plays a role in S’s systematic subordination,
that is, along some dimension, S’s social position is oppressive, and S’s
satisfying (i) and (ii) plays a role in that dimension of subordination. (2012a: 234)
Call this claim (W) (and set aside the many interesting questions involved in working
out the details). Haslanger concedes that (W), construed as an analysis, clashes with a
number of aspects of ordinary and expert usage and belief (e.g., given Haslanger’s
view, feminists should attempt to eliminate women (Haslanger 2012a: 239)). But she
nonetheless maintains that this is the analysis that we should accept—at least if we
share her broadly feminist goals, such as identifying and explaining “persistent
inequalities between females and males” and uncovering how “social forces [ . . . ]
work to perpetuate such inequalities” (2012a: 2267), with an eye toward ultimately
undermining these forces for the sake of social justice.
Analyses like (W) are revisionary in that accepting such an analysis involves a
departure from ordinary or expert usage and belief. But the idea that something
could be both revisionary and an analysis seems to stand in considerable tension with
the idea that analysis must be descriptive. This tension has led opponents of
revisionary analyses to the accusation that such analyses are changing the subject;
roughly, the idea is that if our analysis is not describing current usage of, say,
‘woman’, it must be describing an alternative usage of a homophonic word, a usage
on which ‘woman’ would take on a novel meaning. To take an example from popular
politics, proponents of same-sex marriage are often accused of trying to redefine
‘marriage’, where the subtext of the accusation is that opponents of same-sex marriage
are right about marriage, and proponents (presumably knowing this) want to stop
talking about marriage and start using the word ‘marriage’ to talk about something else.
A similar worrymotivates Jackson’s emphasis on continuity with ordinary thought and
usage; as Jackson sees it, the alternative to descriptive analysis is stipulated change of
meaning, but such stipulation is of little philosophical interest:
If I say that what I mean—never mind what others mean—by a free action is one such that the
agent would have done otherwise if he or she had chosen to, then the existence of free actions
so conceived will be secured, and so will the compatibility of free action with determinism [ . . . ]
I have turned interesting philosophical debates into easy exercises in deductions from stipulative
definitions together with accepted facts. (1998: 31)
Philosophical discussion of revisionary analysis, from Carnap (1956: 7) on, generally
takes for granted the idea that revisionary analyses change the subject in this
sense. The controversy is only over whether (and when and how) it makes sense to
advocate for particular concepts, for particular changes of subject. Thus proponents
of particular revisionary analyses often see themselves as defending the replacement

    
  37
of one concept with another (e.g., Scharp 2013), and proponents of “conceptual
engineering” and “conceptual ethics” present themselves as defending the idea that
we can study questions like “Should we use concept C (over alternative A) ” (Burgess
and Plunkett 2013a,b), and that the answers can inform our understanding of a range
of popular and philosophical debates (Plunkett and Sundell 2013; Thomasson 2016).
In my view, the idea that revisionary analysis requires the replacement of one
concept with another, or with changing the meaning of our words, or with developing
new concepts, is entirely misguided. There is a perfectly natural sense in which one
can advance a revisionary analysis like (W) as an analysis of ‘woman’ as we have
always used it, the word and the concept that we have been employing all along—
without changing the subject or engineering a new concept or anything of the sort.²
There is no conflict between the idea that such analyses are revisionary and the idea
that they are descriptive: they are revisionary, in that they depart from present usage
and beliefs, but are still descriptive in that they are making a claim about what we
mean now and have meant all along. Further, there is a perfectly natural sense in
which revisionary analyses might turn out to be correct—not that it might turn out to
be correct to adopt a new term or concept, or that changing the subject might be the
right thing to do, but that (W) might turn out to be the correct analysis of ‘woman’ as
we have used it all along. (So it might turn out that women are subordinated not just
as a matter of fact, but analytically, and have always been so—no matter how
widespread belief to the contrary may be or have been.)
Of course, none of this is to deny the obvious fact that we sometimes introduce
new terminology (or technical uses of extant terminology), and correspondingly new
concepts, in the course of theorizing. The point is that this is neither the only nor the
most plausible account of what proponents of same-sex marriage, or social constructivist
analyses of gender, or most other related debates are doing. A better
picture—better because (as I will show) it better explains our epistemic engagement
with revisionary analyses—is that conceptual analysis can go beyond (and even
overturn) extant belief and linguistic usage without changing of meaning, and
without introducing new concepts. Our theoretical activity shapes what we mean,
but it does so not by making us mean something new, but by shaping what we meant
all along. So we are rarely if ever faced with two concepts and forced to choose which
to use. We are often faced with new claims and new theories; we accept some and
reject others, on good or bad grounds, and this plays a role in determining our
meanings and our concepts. But this is just part of what it is to be a thinker. There are
² Though Haslanger (2012a) suggests that accepting (W) involves change of meaning, in more recent
work Haslanger (2012b,d) agrees that revisionary theorizing need not be seen as meaning changing. In
support of this claim, she appeals to the metasemantic views of Schroeter, Schroeter, and Bigelow (Bigelow
and Schroeter 2009; Schroeter and Schroeter 2009), according to which (as Haslanger puts it), “interpretation
of our own past linguistic practice with a term and the practice of those around us, together with
empirical investigation, enables us to make judgments about how the term applies; the term refers to what a
fully informed and rational judge in such circumstances would take herself to refer to. To the extent that we
are informed and rational, we can know the correct application of the term” (2012b: 437). I am not
unsympathetic to the spirit of this, and though I have significant doubts about the details, this is not the
place to air them. In the context of this chapter, I would insist only that there is no reason to think that past
linguistic practice (as opposed to the entire course of a linguistic practice, including its future) plays a
distinctive role.
    
                                              
    
    
  38
no interesting questions of conceptual engineering or conceptual ethics, over and
above questions about when we accept (or should accept) certain claims or theories,
of the familiar sort long studied by epistemologists and philosophers of science, as
well as psychologists and philosophers of mind.
This chapter aims to clarify and defend these claims by developing an account of
revisionary analysis that makes sense of our engagement with revisionary analyses,
and in particular, makes sense of the way we argue for and against them—our
epistemic engagement with them. I begin by examining these arguments, and
showing that the view that revisionary analysis involves meaning change or concept
replacement cannot make sense of them. In section 2, I turn to Haslanger’s proposal,
and suggest that her view is best formulated in terms of competing analyses (rather
than in terms of competing concepts). Section 3 develops the relevant notion of
analysis—a notion on which analytic claims fix the meanings of words. Sections 4
and 5 show how this notion can be developed to explain our engagement with
revisionary analyses. A key idea is that analytic claims can emerge in the course of
debate without change of meaning, so that our acceptance (perhaps late in the
course of a discussion) of some analyticity can fix the meaning of a word as we
used it all along.
1. Changing the Subject
Consider the view that accepting a sentence like ‘Two men can marry each other’
amounts to changing the meaning of the word ‘marry’.³ As Jackson might put it, the
claim is that the proponent of same-sex “marriage” says, “this is what I will mean by
‘marriage’—never mind what others mean”; or perhaps better, “this is what I will
mean by ‘marriage’, and others should do the same—never mind what we have
meant in the past”. If this is right, the proponent of same-sex “marriage” might go on
to speak truly by saying things like “Two men can marry each other”. But if someone
thinks that a man can only marry a woman, she should not regard the proponent of
same-sex “marriage” as contradicting her. The proponent’s utterance of ‘Two men
can marry each other’ does not express the proposition that two men can marry each
other; she has not changed her belief in the falsehood of this proposition, but only her
beliefs about what sentences are best used to express it. Her choice to use the term
‘marriage’ in an idiosyncratic way does not change the facts about marriage, any
more than choosing to call a tail a ‘leg’ makes it the case that horses have five legs.
³ The case of same-sex marriage is complicated by the fact that it was until recently a legal impossibility
everywhere for two men to marry each other. But opponents of same-sex marriage—especially the kind of
opponent of same-sex marriage who claims that proponents are changing meaning—tend to think that
same-sex marriage is impossible in a deeper sense (conceptually impossible), so that laws permitting samesex
“marriage” must be regulating some state other than marriage. The claim ‘Two men can marry each
other’ is to be read as advocating the conceptual possibility of same-sex marriage; so (in the dispute I have
in mind) the proponent of same-sex marriage is claiming that it would make sense to have laws that
allowed same-sex marriage (and not merely same-sex “marriage”). This claim could be true even if samesex
marriage were legally impossible (though of course the proponent would presumably also advocate
changing such a law).
    
           
    
    
  39
(And of course this would be true even if the proponent of this way of speaking is able
to convince everyone to adopt her usage.)
If we are talking about legs, and I try to stipulate that ‘leg’ is to be applied to tails,
I am trying to change the subject.4 If my stipulation succeeds and we continue to
speak of “legs”, then the subject has (at least partially) changed; we are no longer
speaking (just) of legs, but of tails as well. (If words are individuated by their
meanings, we are no longer using the same word; I have introduced, and gone on
to use, a mere homonym of the ordinary English word ‘leg’.) When we say “Horses
have five legs”, we should not take ourselves to be disagreeing with those who,
unfamiliar with my stipulation, say, “Horses have four legs”—except, of course,
about a matter of linguistic usage.
Let’s say that an analysis that involves a change of meaning in this way changes the
subject. Self-avowed proponents of conceptual ethics and conceptual engineering,
and some proponents of revisionary analyses, tend to regard revisionary analyses as
changing the subject. Call this claim the subject-change view of revisionary analysis.
Proponents of the subject-change view have made concerted attempts to explain
some aspects of disputes about revisionary analyses. For example, they point to other
cases in which we have a sense of genuine disagreement even where it is clear that the
parties are not asserting contradictory contents (e.g., “I like Steve”; “No, you’re
wrong: I hate him”). And they claim that in many circumstances, a primary purpose
of an assertion may be to communicate metalinguistic information about how words
are to be used (Sundell 2011; Plunkett and Sundell 2013).
These observations are fair enough as far as they go. But there is a great deal more
to explain. We do not simply express disagreement about revisionary analyses and
leave it at that: we offer and respond to arguments for and against them. I claim that
the subject-change view cannot explain our argumentative practice: it cannot make
sense of the kinds of arguments we offer, and the way we respond to these arguments.
Consider, for example, disputes about same-sex marriage. One kind of argument,
invoked especially by opponents of same-sex marriage, appeals explicitly to the
proper use of a word; for example, “We have always used ‘marriage’ to mean a
union of one man and one woman”. (This is, of course, enthymematic; the suppressed
premise, apparently, is that we should continue to use the word as we have in the
past.) Call arguments of this kind—arguments that concern the use of a word, such as
‘marriage’—metalinguistic arguments.
Although opponents of same-sex marriage do advance metalinguistic arguments,
this is not their only argumentative tactic; for example, they sometimes claim that the
purpose of marriage is to produce children. This is (or at least seems to be) an
argument about marriage (rather than an argument about ‘marriage’.) Call arguments
of this kind—arguments that concern something other than the use of a
word—first-order arguments.
4 It might be possible to form a theory that tails are legs; for example, perhaps animals with tails evolved
from animals with five functional legs (so that tails are a sort of vestigial leg). In that sort of case, there need
be no change of subject. But that is not the case I have in mind; the case I have in mind is one in which
I simply stipulate (without argument) that I will use ‘leg’ to apply to tails.
    
                                              
    
    
  40
1.1. The Argument Argument
As a matter of methodology, we should look for an interpretation of these arguments
and our responses to them that makes sense of what we are doing. Of course,
there may be cases in which our arguments just don’t make sense—in which the
parties to the debate are just confused or irrational. But in general, when a debate
seems unconfused, we should try to understand what the participants in the
debate are doing in a way that makes them unconfused. In this kind of case, we
want to be able to say that the parties to a debate are rational, that their contributions
to the debate make sense and contributes in a recognizable way to their aims.
This suggests two requirements on our interpretation of a debate about a revisionary
analysis:
1. It must give parties to the debate reasonably good epistemic status with respect
to the things they say. In many typical cases, this will mean that the parties to
the debate are saying things that they know, or at least justifiably believe, to be
true. In other cases, the relevant epistemic status may be different. For example,
if one party to the debate is attempting a reductio of her opponent’s position,
she should at least know or justifiably believe that what she says is a consequence
of her opponent’s position.
2. It must make assertions relevant to the debate. When a party to the debate
makes an assertion, that assertion should serve some purpose: for example, by
giving evidence for her position or evidence against her opponent’s position.
I claim that no such interpretation of first-order arguments for or against revisionary
analyses is available on the hypothesis that such analyses change the subject.
Let’s call the opponent of same-sex marriage O and the proponent of same-sex
marriage P; and consider O’s assertion of (1):
(1) The purpose of marriage is to produce children.
Now on the hypothesis that O is changing the subject, there are two ways of
interpreting this utterance, since the change of subject would mean that there are
two meanings of ‘marriage’ at issue in the conversation. On one interpretation, O is
using ‘marriage’ in her own preferred way, to pick out a status that it is by definition
impossible for same-sex couples to enter into; call this status marriage1. On the other,
O is using ‘marriage’ in P’s way, to pick out a status that same-sex couples can enjoy;
call this status marriage2.
I claim that neither interpretation can make sense of the debate. Suppose first that
O is using ‘marriage’ in her own preferred way. Then (let’s suppose) her assertion of
(1) might well express a truth—a truth that O is in a position to know. So we are able
to satisfy our first requirement on an interpretation.
But we are not in a position to satisfy the second requirement. For the proposition
that the purpose of marriage1 is to produce children simply does not bear on P’s
position. Indeed, P may accept this claim; it is, after all, entirely consistent with the
idea that ‘marriage’ should be used to mean marriage2. So on the hypothesis that O is
using ‘marriage’ to mean marriage1, her utterance of (1) just looks irrelevant to the
debate.
    
           
    
    
  41
Suppose instead that O is using ‘marriage’ in P’s way. This may seem like a
surprising way for O to behave, but it could make sense for O to take on P’s way
of speaking for the sake of argument, in order to illustrate its consequences. For
example, if you try to stipulate that ‘tail’ be applied to all and only round squares,
I might object “But then there are no tails!” In this kind of situation, my first-order
objection makes sense: I argue the way I do because I take it that you will be able to
see that what I am saying is a consequence of your view, and I think it likely that you
will regard this consequence as unacceptable.
But this cannot be what is going on in O’s assertion of (1). Though (1), on this
interpretation, is something that P will regard as unacceptable, it is no consequence
of her view. On the contrary: on the hypothesis that P is using ‘marriage’ to mean
marriage2, she should regard (1) as an obvious falsehood; moreover, it is an obvious
falsehood that is obviously not entailed by her position. So on this interpretation, O’s
utterance of (1) fails to meet either of our criteria: it is an obvious falsehood that
O could neither reasonably believe nor reasonably believe bears any relevance to P’s
position, and it is hard to imagine any reason that it might make sense for O to
attempt to use it in the debate.
So the most natural interpretations of the debate on the subject change view fail to
make sense of O’s assertion. As the debate continues, we will find the same pattern:
the subject-change view simply cannot make sense of many of the argumentative
moves. So even if the subject-change view can explain the fact that disputes about
revisionary analyses involve genuine disagreement, it cannot explain how these
disputes are conducted: it cannot explain the way we argue. And—given that these
arguments really do make sense—this constitutes a powerful argument against the
subject-change view, which I call the argument argument.
1.2. Two Responses
I now want to consider two ways of responding to the argument argument. The first
response has it that we are adopting too limited a view of the possible purposes of the
debate. True, O’s utterance of (1) will not convince anyone of a first-order proposition.
But there are other cases in which an utterance of an apparently first-order
sentence primarily functions to communicate metalinguistic information. For
example, a person newly arrived at an Antarctic research station may ask with a
shiver, “Is this cold ”; we could answer the question by pointing at a salient
thermometer and saying, “This isn’t cold”. The thermometer is clearly visible: there
is no mystery about the temperature, and no point in trying to communicate
information about what the temperature is. Our utterance—despite the fact that it
is not overtly metalinguistic—functions primarily to communicate information
about how the word ‘cold’ should be used around here (Sundell (2011); Plunkett
and Sundell (2013); and see also Barker (2002, 2013)).
I agree that our utterances often communicate metalinguistic information in the
way described; and I also agree that there is something metalinguistic going on in
the dispute: if I say, “Two women can marry each other”, one of the purposes of my
utterance is to communicate information about how I think the word ‘marriage’
ought to be used. But two points need to be made. First, even if our dispute is in part
metalinguistic, this does not entail (or even suggest) that the subject-change view is
    
                                              
    
    
  42
correct. It is entirely possible (indeed, common) for someone who uses a word with a
particular meaning to communicate metalinguistic information about how that word
ought to be used to someone who uses it with the very same meaning. (Plausibly, this
happens every time I use a sentence to make an assertion: I assert the proposition
expressed by my use of the sentence, but I also communicate that that sentence is
correctly used in these circumstances to express a truth.)
Second, it is not obvious how the claim that our dispute is metalinguistic helps us
make sense of O’s utterance of (1). This utterance does not bear in any obvious way on
the claim that ‘marriage’ should be used to express marriage2. Even if we concede that
O’smain intent in uttering (1) is to convince P of a metalinguistic proposition, it is very
hard to imagine any way that uttering (1) could reasonably be thought to aid in this
goal. So the observation that the debate is or could be in partmetalinguistic simply does
not help meet our second desideratum. Even if the debate is metalinguistic, given the
subject-change view, advancing arguments of this kind just doesn’t make sense.
So the subject-change view cannot make good sense of the role an assertion of (1)
plays in the debate. The second response to the argument is to question whether
making sense of the debate should really be one of our aims. Perhaps arguments of
this kind are just confused; perhaps an utterance of (1) really would express either the
obvious falsehood that the purpose of marriage2 is to produce children, or (more
plausibly) the possibly true but irrelevant claim that the purpose of marriage1 is to
produce children.
If this is what is going on, then we would expect P (to the extent that she is
unconfused) to reply simply by pointing out the fact that O’s assertion of (1) is
irrelevant. This is, after all, how a comparable debate would proceed in a case where it
is uncontroversial that the subject has changed. For example, suppose I stipulate that
‘leg’ is to apply to tails, and say “Horses have five legs”; and suppose that you object
that horses have only four legs. To the extent that I am unconfused, I will not see your
objection as a threat to my view and I will not try to refute it; the right response for
me to make is something like, “As you are using the term, I agree; but that fact—
admitted on all sides—does not bear on my claim about the preferred use of ‘leg’.”
I admit that it would be possible in many cases for P to respond in something like
this way. (P need not actually agree that (1) is correct on anyone’s view of ‘marriage’,
but she could at least argue that its correctness is irrelevant to her view: “That may be
so, as you are using the term; but true or no, it does not bear on my claim”.) I also
agree that the subject-change view is plausible if this kind of response is made and
accepted. (In my view, responding in this way goes toward making it the case that we
are using the word ‘marriage’ with different meanings; see section 5 below.) But this
is not the way debates about same-sex marriage typically proceed, and it is certainly
not the only way they can proceed. When confronted with (1), it is very natural (and
apparently rational) for P to feel a tension between this claim and her view. Given
this tension, a typical, apparently reasonable response is to dispute the claim (e.g., by
pointing out that elderly opposite-sex couples can be married, even though they
cannot produce children).
Now perhaps the subject-change view can make some kind of sense of this
response; the most natural suggestion is probably that P is adopting O’s way of
speaking in order to show that her view has absurd consequences, as in the “But then
    
           
    
    
  43
there are no tails” case. But this does not fully explain the phenomenon, because it
does not explain P’s reaction to O’s utterance, and therefore does not explain why
P responds in the way she does. In a typical case, P will feel that O has launched an
attack on her view that puts her view under pressure; if O’s claim (1) is true, P thinks,
her view has a real problem. So she feels obliged to argue against (1).
This reaction—the feeling that what has been asserted is incompatible with one’s
view, so that one must offer first-order resistance—is something that the subjectchange
view cannot explain. Of course, it is possible that this reaction is grounded in
confusion—that in fact there is no such incompatibility, no such pressure on P’s view.
No one thinks that debates over same-sex marriage are conducted under conditions
of ideal rationality, and it is certainly possible that we make mistakes. But, as I have
emphasized, this reaction is utterly normal. Most participants in this kind of debate—
even philosophers raised on a strict regimen of distinguishing use and mention—feel
that assertions like (1) constitute a threat to their view, and a corresponding need to
engage in first-order argument. The claim that we are all so confused about what is
going on is to be resisted as long as some alternative interpretation is available (and,
as I will go on to show, one is available once we reject the subject-change view).
I conclude that the replies to the argument argument fail: the subject-change view
simply fails to make sense of the way we argue for and against revisionary analyses;
and even in those cases where the subject-change view has a partial story to tell, it
often fails to explain the whole phenomenon.
2. Concepts
Let me try to relate the way of thinking about the threat of subject change that we
have been developing to some things Haslanger says. As Haslanger puts the point, the
worry is that when we have changed the subject “The term [ . . . ] expresses a different
concept than it did” (2012c: 394). The picture seems to be that concepts are or
correspond to word meanings, so that distinct words (i.e., distinct word types)
express different concepts. This way of putting the point suggests that terms always
or at least typically express only one concept at a time (in the sense that for a given
person at a given time, there is a single concept expressed by all typical uses of the
term). But this would sit awkwardly with other things Haslanger says about concepts.
Haslanger distinguishes between two analytic projects (in addition to her own
“ameliorative project”). One involves collecting our “intuitive” reactions to hypothetical
cases and principles and trying to reach a set of principles that best systematizes
these reactions; Haslanger regards this as producing an analysis of our manifest
concept—“the concept I thought I was guided by and saw myself as attempting to
apply” (2012c: 388). The other that involves collecting and systematizing empirical
information about our actual classificatory judgments; Haslanger regards this as
producing an analysis of our operative concept—“the concept that best captures the
type we are concerned with” (p. 387). One’s manifest concept can be distinct from
one’s operative concept, as the following example from Jennifer Saul illustrates:
If we are investigating our manifest concept of democracy, then, we will probably arrive at a
standard that requires (at least) elections that are free of voter intimidation, the counting of all
    
                                              
    
    
  44
ballots, equal access to polling places for all voters, and so on. [ . . . ] If we are investigating our
operative concept of democracy, [ . . . ] we may well find that we apply the term far more
broadly than our manifest concept would suggest. It may turn out that our operative concept of
democracy requires only regular elections and that all adult citizens be formally permitted to
vote. This is compatible with substantial voter intimidation, great variation in access to polling
places, and ballots going uncounted. We could find out that this is our operative concept by
noticing that in fact we apply the term ‘democracy’ even when we know that voters were
intimidated, ballots went uncounted, and so on. (2006: 124)
So on the one hand, Haslanger thinks that change of subject involves using a word to
express a different concept; but on the other, she thinks that words are often
associated with multiple concepts. And while this combination of views isn’t incoherent,
it seems awkward. Fortunately, the difficulty is not deep; resolving it just
requires some terminological regimentation.
I take beliefs (desires, etc.) to be mental representations. There is a sense in which
different thinkers never share mental representations: my representations are in my
head, and yours are in your head. But there is another sense in which you and I might
believe the same thing; we do not share a belief token, but we have a belief of the same
type. To say that a thinker possesses a particular concept is to say that she has mental
representations of a certain type.
There are many ways of grouping token representations into types—type-individuating
them, in the jargon—and different ways may be appropriate for different purposes.
For example, it may make sense to individuate mental representations in an
extremely fine-grained way, so that different thinkers rarely if ever share concepts,
and one’s concepts very often change over time, as one’s beliefs and inferential
dispositions change (e.g., Block 1986). But there are other purposes for which it
makes sense to individuate concepts in a less fine-grained way, so that a thinker can
retain the same concept over time despite changes in belief, and different thinkers
often share the same concepts.
One such purpose is tracking the kind of facts about certain kinds of agreement
and disagreement, as well as closely related facts about successful communication
and argument. We have already conceded that some genuine disagreements do not
involve parties asserting contradictory contents, so that there can be genuine disagreement
despite difference in meaning; but we have also seen that disagreements
that support a full range of first-order arguments are not like this. The most natural
way to make sense of these disputes will involve individuating concepts in a less finegrained
way.
Here is a simple way of developing the picture. Suppose that you tell me, “Fido is a
dog”. You are expressing a certain belief—a mental representation of a particular
type—and I understand you only if I entertain a mental representation of the same
type. If I believe you, I am justified only if the mental representation I form is a
representation of the same type you expressed (at least in typical cases). My utterance
of “Fido is a dog” expresses or constitutes agreement with your utterance of the samesounding
sentence just in case the two utterances are expressing beliefs of the same
type. And so on.
    
           
    
    
  45
Similar sorts of points can be made even if we are paying attention to a single
thinker. If at one time I say, “Fido is a dog”, but at a later time I say, “Fido is not a
dog”, have I changed my mind  The answer depends on whether I reject at the later
time a thought of the type that I had earlier accepted, and this amounts to whether
‘Fido’ and ‘dog’ (and perhaps also ‘is’ and ‘a’) express the same concepts in both
utterances. If I am inclined to say both “Fido is a dog” and “Fido is not a dog” at the
same time, am I incoherent  Again, the answer depends on what types of belief
I would express by these sentences.
If we want concepts to do this kind of work, we have to individuate them so that
thinkers can have the same concepts over time and across changes of view. I may
disagree with an interlocutor about many weighty matters, matters central to our
discussion; I may despite this understand her, and agree with much of what she says.
This requires that we share concepts of the same type. I may change some of my
beliefs on a given topic while still retaining others, and again this requires individuating
concepts in such a way that I can retain concepts of the same type despite my
change of view.
Let’s not dispute whether there are other ways of treating these phenomena; I am
happy to concede that there could be. There are, after all, many ways of individuating
mental representations. Our purpose now is simply to lay out some stipulations
about one useful way of using the word ‘concept’; I am stipulating that concepts are
individuated in at least a somewhat coarse-grained way, and indicating (admittedly
roughly) how the individuation is to go.
If we are individuating concepts in this way, then we should not think of the
manifest “concept” and the operative “concept” as being distinct concepts (at least in
typical cases). If they were, then we should see no conflict between our judgment that
democracy requires that all citizens have equal access to polling places, and our
judgment that (say) the USA is a democracy, even if we discover that many regions of
the USA have enacted voter identification laws specifically designed to reduce the
ability of certain groups to vote. Since my judgments about the theoretical principle
(which brings to bear my “manifest concept”) and my judgment about the USA (which
brings to bear my “operative concept”) involve different concepts, there is no inconsistency
between them. We could simply rest content with our view.
It is quite possible that some cases fit this model. But the most natural understanding
of the “democracy” case does not seem like this. If we judge that the USA is
a democracy, but fails to meet some of the general conditions we judge necessary for
democracy, this would generate a real feeling of conflict. The judgments just seem
inconsistent. Anyone who finds themselves in this position and fails to take steps to
reconcile her view—coming to believe that the USA is not a democracy, modifying
the principle that democracy requires equal access, etc.—is pro tanto irrational.
So if the result of an “analysis of our manifest concept of democracy” and the result
of an “analysis of our operative concept of democracy” are not analyses of distinct
concepts, what are they  On the way of individuating concepts that we are now
considering, we should think of these not as analyses of different concepts, but as
competing proposed analyses of one and the same concept. To get clear on why this
makes sense, we will need to turn to the notion of analysis.
    
                                              
    
    
  46
3. Analyticity
Haslanger proposes (W) as an analysis of ‘woman’, and I take it that this proposal
entails that (W) is an analytic truth.5 But what exactly does it mean for a claim to be
analytic, or to be proposed as an analysis 
Analysis and analyticity came under heavy scrutiny after Quine’s (1953, 1966a,b)
critique. Traditional accounts of analyticity combined metaphysical and epistemological
elements, usefully distinguished by Boghossian as follows:
Epistemic analyticity A sentence S is epistemically analytic iff “mere grasp of S’s
meaning by T suffice[s] for T’s being justified in holding S true”. (1997: 334)
Metaphysical analyticity A sentence S is metaphysically analytic if “in some
appropriate sense, it owes its truth-value completely to its meaning, and not at
all to ‘the facts’”. (1997: 334)
It’s hard to see how metaphysical analyticity could be relevant to revisionary analyses
(like Haslanger’s), and that’s a good thing: with Boghossian and most others, I take
Quine’s attack on metaphysical analyticity to have been decisive. Our meaning that
Hesperus is Hesperus by “Hesperus is Hesperus” doesn’t make it the case that
Hesperus is Hesperus; what makes it the case that Hesperus is Hesperus is a thoughtand
language-independent fact.
Boghossian himself defends epistemic analyticity, and although this cannot be the
right account of what it is to be analytic in the sense relevant to our debate—manifest
analyses, for example, will typically be known on the basis of empirical investigation,
not justifiably believable by anyone who grasps them—investigating Boghossian’s
case will help reveal another element in notion of analyticity that will provide a
framework for understanding revisionary analyses like Haslanger’s.
The foundation of Boghossian’s defense of epistemic analyticity is a view about
what it takes to possess certain concepts, such as the concepts of geometry: “grasp of
the indefinables of geometry consists precisely in the adoption of one set of truths
involving them” (1997: 348). More generally:
Adoption Grasp A term t is grasped by adoption (or a-grasped) just in case there is
some set of truths S which is such that one understands t iff one accepts each
member of S.
Boghossian’s main interest is in logic; there, his idea is that (e.g.) one possesses the
concept of conjunction just in case one accepts principles like, “If p and q, then p”. He
claims that this account of grasp “generates” (1997: 348) the following account of
how logical constants get their meanings:
It is by arbitrarily stipulating that certain sentences of logic are to be true, or that certain
inferences are to be valid, that we attach a meaning to the logical constants. More specifically, a
particular constant means that logical object, if any, which would make valid a specified set of
sentences and/or inferences involving it. (1997: 348)
5 I will also extend the term ‘analytic’ to obvious entailments of analyses, so that (e.g.) if (W) is an
analysis, then it is an analytic truth that women are oppressed).
    
           
    
    
  47
We can generalize the proposal in the following way:
Implicit Definition A term t is implicitly defined iff we attach a meaning to t by
arbitrarily stipulating that certain sentences involving t are to be true. More
specifically, t has that meaning, if any, which would make true a specified set of
sentences involving it.
If Implicit Definition is true, then there is a sense in which certain sentences are true
by convention. But Boghossian argues convincingly that there is no threat that
implicit definitions will result in conventional truths of the sort that Quine’s arguments
show to be problematic. Perhaps the simplest way to see the point is on the
view that propositions—the meanings of sentences—are the primary truth bearers, so
that a sentence is true only if it expresses a true proposition. We can imagine
propositions having their truth values fixed antecedently to any human linguistic
activity. Stipulation makes it the case that a particular sentence expresses a particular
proposition; it does not make it the case that the proposition expressed by the
sentence is true.
Consider an example. Suppose that the length of a certain rod r is l, so that the
proposition that the length of r is l is true (and true independently of human thought
and linguistic activity). Then we can introduce the term ‘meter’ by stipulating: “The
length of r is one meter”. Given the meanings of the other words in the sentence
(‘The’, ‘length’, ‘of ’, etc.), the syntactic structure of the sentence, and the composition
rules of the language, there are a variety of propositions that the sentence might
express, depending on what ‘meter’ means: the proposition that the length of r is h,
the proposition that the length of r is l, the proposition that the length of r is m, etc.
By stipulating that “The length of r is one meter” expresses a truth, we fix on a
particular candidate—the only true candidate in the vicinity: the proposition that the
length of r is l. This in turn fixes the meaning of ‘meter’: given the extant meanings of
‘The’, ‘length’, etc., and the facts about syntax and composition, “The length of r is
one meter” expresses the proposition that the length of r is l only if ‘meter’ picks out l.
It is clear in this example that our linguistic stipulations have not made true any
non-linguistic facts. The facts about length were fixed prior to our stipulation.
Something like this model of Implicit Definition provides the foundation of what
we will develop in what follows. But in order to avail ourselves of this foundation, we
will need to rethink what it takes to grasp the meaning of an implicitly defined term,
as well as the notion of stipulation.
3.1. Implicit Definition and Adoption Grasp
Implicit Definition would fit neatly with Adoption Grasp. But the two are in principle
separable; an Implicit Definition-style account of how words get their meaning is
compatible with any number of accounts of how meaning can be grasped.
Here is an example. Consider Kripke’s (1980) causal picture of meaning: a word is
introduced at an initial baptism, and later uses get their meaning in virtue of their
connection to this initial baptism. A typical instance of such a baptism might
involve pointing at a certain baby and saying something like, “I hereby name this
baby ‘Ansel’”. This is an arbitrary stipulation that attaches a meaning to the word
‘Ansel’. But it does not exactly fit the template described in Implicit Definition, since
    
                                              
    
    
  48
we are not stipulating that any sentence is true. So let’s reformulate our initial
baptism: “I hereby stipulate that the following sentence is true: ‘The baby in room
110, Ninewells Hospital, at 10:00am GMT 25th April 2013, is Ansel’”. Plausibly,
then, the meaning of ‘Ansel’ has been fixed by arbitrarily stipulating that a certain
sentence involving ‘Ansel’ is true. So ‘Ansel’ is implicitly defined.
But note that this does not entail that Adoption Grasp is true of ‘Ansel’. On the
contrary: Kripke’s view has it that later speakers grasp ‘Ansel’ in virtue of their causal
connection to the initial baptism. He specifically rejects the idea that speakers’
competence with a term depends on entertaining the stipulation with which a
word is introduced. So a word can be implicitly defined but not a-grasped.
It might be objected at this point that on Kripke’s story, the meaning of ‘Ansel’ as it
is used by later speakers is not determined solely by the stipulation. Instead, it is
determined by the stipulation and the later speakers’ causal connection to that
stipulation. If that is right, then ‘Ansel’ is not implicitly defined.
This is a fair point. In general, we should allow that a stipulation can play a
significant role in fixing the meaning of a word, while also allowing that other factors
may also play a role. So we should allow for the possibility that stipulation partially
fixes the meaning of a word, while other factors also play a role:
Partial Implicit Definition A term t is p-implicitly defined iff t has the meaning it
does at least in part in virtue to an arbitrary stipulation that certain sentences
involving t are to be true. More specifically, if t has a meaning, it has a meaning
which would make true a specified set of sentences involving it.
What we have established so far, then, is that partial implicit definition and adoption
grasp can come apart, at least in principle; a term can be p-implicitly defined but not
a-grasped. And this is a good thing: Boghossian’s defence of epistemic analyticity has
come under sustained attack, notably in the work of Timothy Williamson (2006,
2007). Williamson points out that experts with idiosyncratic theoretical views can
dissent from even the most basic and plausible truths involving a word. For example,
Williamson suggests that a thinker might reject an elementary logical truth like
“Every vixen is a vixen”—an instance of a principle acceptance of which might well
be held to be constitutive of understanding of ‘every’—because she maintains that ‘every’
has existential import, and denies that there are vixens. Similarly, Williamson points to
logicians who reject modus ponens. Such thinkers seem to be counterexamples to the
claim that logical terminology is a-grasped: these experts seem to understand ‘every’ and
‘if ’, while rejecting principles in which this understanding putatively consists.
There have been, of course, a variety of attempts to resist Williamson’s examples
(e.g., Boghossian 2011); but I, for one, continue to find the examples convincing. But
there is need for care. Williamson’s examples refute the claim that Adoption Grasp
is true of words like ‘every’ and ‘if ’. They do not refute the claim that these words are
p-implicitly defined. For example, one could imagine a Kripke-style view on which
‘if ’ means what it does because of our causal connection to an ancient stipulation.
(I do not claim that this is a plausible story, only that it is unscathed by Williamson’s
examples.)
The crucial lesson of Kripke’s causal theory, for our purposes, is just that the
stipulation that p-implicitly defines a word need not be grasped (known, believed,
    
           
    
    
  49
entertained) by competent users of the term. The meanings of my words can be fixed
by stipulations that are spatially and temporally distant from me—stipulations that
I am in no position to know of.
3.2. From Implicit Definition to Metasemantic Analyticity
A further thread in Quine’s critique is that the notion of analyticity is unclear, and
that attempts to clarify or explain it are either circular or rely on equally unclear
notions of meaning or synonymy. Carnap’s response was to offer an account that
suited the formal languages that are the primary focus of his Meaning and Necessity
(1956).6 In developing such a formal language, we may stipulate that certain sentences
are to be regarded as meaning postulates. Carnap’s idea is that a sentence is
analytic just in case it is entailed by the set of meaning postulates.
Carnap’s use of meaning postulates is meant to ground metaphysical analyticities:
analyticity is understood as truth in virtue of meaning. But meaning postulates were
also taken up by proponents of Montague grammar in the 1970s and 1980s (see, e.g.,
Montague 1974: 21213; Dowty et al. 1981: 2245). In these works, the metaphysical
ambitions have largely dropped away. The role of meaning postulates is to help to
fix the meaning of certain terms. The basic idea is simple. In Montague grammar,
expressions are assigned semantic values relative to a model. To say that a certain
sentence is a meaning postulate is to say that we will only consider models that make
that sentence true. Since logical truth is defined as truth at every model, meaning
postulates will be logical truths.
Let’s consider a simplified example. Suppose that the semantic values of one-place
predicates are sets of individuals (the individuals of which the predicate is true), so
that a sentence like (2) is true if and only if the semantic value of ‘bachelor’ is a subset
of the semantic value of ‘unmarried’:
(2) For all x, if x is a bachelor then x is unmarried
By letting (2) be a meaning postulate, we restrict our attention to models relative to
which the sentence is true, so models relative to which semantic value of ‘bachelor’ is
a subset of the semantic value of ‘unmarried’. The idea is that although this does not
completely determine the meanings of ‘bachelor’ and ‘unmarried’, it puts a constraint
on, and so partially fixes, them.
The traditional metaphysical notion of analyticity had it that some sentences were
true in virtue of their meanings. The use of meaning postulates that we are now
considering flips this on its head: some expressions have the meanings they do in
virtue of our holding certain sentences true. Instead of truth in virtue of meaning, we
have meaning in virtue of truth: by stipulating that we will only consider interpretations
of our words that make a certain sentence true, we have put a constraint on,
hence partially determined, the meanings of the words that compose that sentence.
It is no accident if meaning postulates remind one of partial implicit definitions.
They play an extremely similar role; in effect, meaning postulates p-implicitly define
6 Carnap characterizes his project here as explication, which he sees as involving the replacement of one
concept by another; but (of course) on my view we need not accept this characterization.
    
                                              
    
    
  50
the words that compose them. I suggest that sentences that p-implicitly define
(some of) the words that compose them deserve to be thought of as analytic in the
following sense:
Metasemantic Analyticity A sentence is metasemantically analytic with respect to
a word (or a use of a word) iff the meaning of that (use of the) word is partially
fixed by the stipulation that the sentence is to be true (i.e., iff the sentence
p-implicitly defines the word).
Metasemantic analyticity has, perhaps, received less attention in the literature on
analyticity than epistemic and metaphysical analyticity, in part because it plays a less
important role in the metaphysical and epistemological debates to which analyticity
has often been turned (e.g., there is no clear role for metasemantic analyticity in
giving an account of metaphysical modality, or of a priori knowledge). But there is
nonetheless a notable tradition of using the word ‘analyticity’ to pick out metasemantic
analyticity. Meaning postulates are, after all, what is analytic on Carnap’s
account, and one of their primary roles (the role picked up on by Montagovians) is to
fix meaning. And metasemantic analyticity is the notion most relevant to the many
discussions of analyticity in the work of Fodor and his collaborators. To take just one
representative example, Fodor and Pylyshyn write, “analytic beliefs can’t be revised
without changing the content of (some or all of ) their conceptual constituents; that
is, they can’t be changed without equivocating” (2015: 57). This passage only makes
sense if what is at issue is something like metasemantic analyticity (applied to beliefs
and the representations that compose them rather than to natural language sentences
and words): the idea is that some of our beliefs determine the content of their
representational constituents, so that changing these beliefs would correspondingly
change the content of the constituents. What is at issue is how the contents of
certain mental representations are determined: that is, the metasemantics of those
representations.
So there is an established pattern of using ‘analyticity’ to pick out metasemantic
analyticities in the literature. On my view, proposed revisionary analyses, such as
Haslanger’s (W), should be seen as attempts at metasemantic analysis.
4. Timing
Let’s pause to take stock. I began by showing that the subject-change view cannot
explain how we argue for revisionary analyses, and I have now developed the notion
of metasemantic analyticity, which I claim to be relevant to revisionary analysis. But
at this point it may be unclear how my rejection of the subject-change view can be
reconciled with my embrace of metasemantic analyticity. For isn’t the proponent of
the subject-change model precisely endorsing the claim that revisionary analyses are
a kind of stipulation that introduces a new meaning for a word (and hence changes
the subject)  After all, what makes it the case that post-revision uses of the word have
a different meaning  Surely it is the revisionary analysis—the stipulation—but that is
just to say that the revisionary analysis partially fixes the meaning of the word and so
is metasemantically analytic.
    
           
    
    
  51
I propose to grant that revisionary analyses—if successful—are metasemantically
analytic. (We will return momentarily to the question of what makes a revisionary
analysis successful when it is.) But we can grant this without embracing the subjectchange
view. On the subject continuity model that I advocate, there is no new
meaning; a successful stipulation fixes the meaning of the word as it was used all
along.
It must be admitted that the subject-change view would fit well with our standard
conception of stipulation. Stipulated definitions are typically thought of as coming
when a word is first introduced. But what motivates this conception  One possible
motivation comes from Adoption Grasp: if users of a word must grasp the stipulated
definition, then the stipulation must occur before the word is used. But as we have
seen, there are popular and plausible views on which p-implicit definition (and hence
metasemantic analyticity) can be prised apart from Adoption Grasp. On these views,
the stipulation that p-implicitly defines a word can be made by an unknown person
in the distant past, and the stipulation need not be known by current users of the
word as long as they are causally connected to it in the right way. So users of a word
need not accept the sentence that p-implicitly defines that word; a word I use can get
its meaning (at least in part) from a stipulation made by someone else, of which I am
not even aware.
The subject continuity view is a development of this idea. Although the Kripkean
causal picture rejects the view that users of a term must grasp the stipulation that
introduced, it retains the idea that stipulations that fix the meanings of my words
must be temporally prior to my use of those words: first someone stipulates, and that
gives later uses of the words meaning. In my view, the key to understanding
revisionary analyses is that they involve a stipulation that (partially) fixes the
meaning of prior uses of the word: in this kind of case, first we go about using a
word, then later we make the stipulation that gives meaning.7
On this view, in typical cases of revisionary analysis there is no change of meaning
and no change of subject. Words are used univocally throughout a discourse; each
word expresses the same concept throughout, even when one party proposes a
revisionary analysis. What happens when a proposed revisionary analysis is successful
is that stipulations that fix the meaning of a word (throughout the discourse) have
emerged late in the discourse.
The subject continuity view may seem like a radical departure from familiar
conceptions of stipulation and analyticity—perhaps it constitutes a somewhat revisionary
analysis of stipulation and of analyticity—but it is inevitable given the
conclusions that we have already reached. The argument argument gives us reason
to reject the subject-change view: we should maintain that words are univocal—that
no meaning-change occurs and no new concepts are introduced—before and after
revisionary analysis. But we have also granted that successful revisionary analyses are
in fact (metasemantic) analyses; they partially fix the meanings of words. Since they
7 The general term for views on which the meaning of an expression or the content of a thought can
depend on facts about later times is temporal externalism. For discussion and defence, see Jackman (1999,
2005); Ball (forthcoming).
    
                                              
    
    
  52
do not introduce new meanings or new words, they must fix the meanings that words
have had all along. And this is just the core claim of the subject continuity view.
5. Successful Analysis
But the subject continuity view may seem to leave us with a serious problem. On
traditional views of stipulation, such as the subject-change view—views on which
stipulation precedes use—in typical cases there will be no serious problem in
determining whether a given stipulation was successful: if we make a stipulation,
and then go on to use the word stipulatively introduced, the stipulation was successful.
8 But on the subject continuity view, the picture is more complex. We may have
multiple parties to a dispute, each proposing a competing revisionary analysis, all of
which purport to fix the meaning of the same set of uses of a term. What makes it the
case that one of these proposed analyses fixes the meaning, while the others do not 
In order to answer this question, I want to begin by considering a metasemantic
story that some philosophers have taken to support the subject-change view that we
have just rejected: the view that meaning is use. As this slogan is typically interpreted
in this debate, the view that meaning is use amounts to the view that the extension of
a term as used by a speaker is determined by that speaker’s dispositions to apply the
term and to withhold application of the term. Call this meaning is use now (MIUN). 
MIUN suggests that revisionary analysts are changing the subject, since (at least to
the extent their dispositions to apply the term are consistent with their proposed
analysis) revisionary analysts will exhibit quite a different pattern of applying and
withholding the term at issue; for example, the proponent of same-sex marriage will
apply the term ‘marriage’ to same-sex unions while her opponent will not, and
Haslanger will withhold ‘woman’ from females who are not subordinated (if such
there be).
The problem with MIUN is similar to the problem with the subject-change view: it
cannot make sense of our argumentative practice. We have already seen that the
subject-change view has trouble making sense of the full range of first-order argument,
and to the extent that MIUN is committed to the subject-change view, it will
share this problem. I now want to emphasize an additional problem with the view
that meaning is use now: it cannot make sense of how we respond to arguments. In
particular, it cannot make sense of apparently rational and correct change of view.
We may be convinced by a revisionary analysis. Suppose that I once believed that
same-sex marriage was impossible (and said things like, “A man can only marry a
woman and vice-versa”), but I was convinced by some argument that same-sex
marriage is possible after all. To keep the case simple, suppose that this last belief
is stable (and so not overturned by further argument), and that most or all of my
fellow speakers come to share my view.
8 Perhaps we need to make some further allowances to prevent the stipulative introduction of ‘tonk’ and
the like, but these complexities are not relevant to our present concerns.
  See Sundell (2012) for a defence of this kind of view from a proponent of the idea that revisionary
analysis requires meaning change.
    
           
    
    
  53
How would I describe my change of view  One thing that I would take to have
changed is my metalinguistic beliefs; I used to take “Same-sex couples can marry” to
express a falsehood, but I came to believe that it expresses a truth. But this is neither
the only nor the most central belief that I would take to have changed; I would also
take myself to have believed that a man can only marry a woman, and to have come
to reject this belief and to believe instead that same-sex couples can marry. (I might
say things like, “I used to think that two women could not marry each other, but now
I see that I was wrong.”) That is, I would take my first-order views about marriage to
have changed.
In section 1.1, I suggested that as a matter of methodology, we should look for an
interpretation of our debates about revisionary analysis that makes sense of what
participants in the debate are doing. The same is true here: we should look for an
account of the debates that makes sense of our informed judgments about them. Of
course, we are not infallible about what we believed and meant. But other things
equal—in cases when we are not obviously confused, irrational, suffering from
memory failure, and so on—an interpretation that makes sense of our judgments is
to be preferred to an interpretation that does not. And since all that is at issue here is
remembering my past views, and judging whether my current view is inconsistent
with them, the most obvious way an interpretation can make sense of my judgment is
by making it correct. (Perhaps this is the only way to make sense of it: since nothing is
wrong with my memory, it seems hard to explain how I could fall into error.)
This is something that MIUN cannot deliver. According to MIUN, my dispositions
to apply ‘marriage’ before I heard of the revisionary analysis make it the case
that ‘marriage’ as I used it picked out a relation that men can stand in only to women
and vice-versa, while my dispositions after I accept the revisionary analysis make it
the case that ‘marriage’ as I use it picks out a relation that men can stand in to other
men. So MIUN cannot make me right when I say, ‘I used to think that two women
could not marry each other, but now I see that I was wrong’. As I use ‘marriage’ at the
time of this utterance, it isn’t true that I used to think that two women could not
‘marry’ each other, and what I used to think wasn’t wrong. So in order to make me
correct, what is wanted is a view that predicts not that the meaning of ‘marriage’ has
changed, but that what I meant all along is the relation that same-sex couples can
stand in. In this case, the revisionary analysis has succeeded: claims like “Two men
can marry each other” are metasemantically analytic of ‘marry’ as I used it all along.
Of course, there are cases in which MIUN delivers more plausible results. But even
in these cases, it gets the right answer for the wrong reason. Suppose I accept that being
a woman is a matter of biological fact, and say things like “Necessarily, a person is a
woman iff she has two X chromosomes”—until a philosopher puts forward (W) as an
analysis of ‘woman’. I consider the analysis, and despite some intriguing arguments,
I decide that the balance of considerations pull against accepting it. So I judge that (W)
is false, and that “Necessarily, a person is a woman iff she has two X chromosomes” is
true. To keep the case simple, suppose that my rejection of (W) and my continued
acceptance of the biological view are stable (and so not overturned by further argument),
and that most or all of my fellow speakers share my views (so also reject (W)
and accept the biological account of sex). And suppose further that in the end even the
proponent of (W) changes her mind and becomes convinced that (W) is false.
    
                                              
    
    
  54
Again, on the assumption that I am being reasonable—not unduly stubborn, not
neglecting relevant evidence, etc.—then my judgment is something we should aim to
make sense of, and the obvious way to do this is by making it correct. So we want a
view that predicts that in this case, ‘woman’ as I use it picks out a biological concept
that makes no reference to social status. (W) purports to be an analysis of ‘woman’,
but in the end fails to do metasemantic work.
MIUN delivers this result; but we have already seen that it fails elsewhere, so that
we need to look for a different view. One suggestion would be to appeal to a wider
range of dispositions: not only dispositions to apply the term, but also dispositions to
respond to new information and so on. For example, perhaps the difference between
the described ‘marriage’ case and the described ‘woman’ case turns on my dispositions
to respond to revisionary analyses. This strategy may make sense in some cases.
But in general, our dispositions are messy. I may be disposed to respond favourably
to some arguments (in some moods, when presented by some interlocutors, in some
tones of voice) but not others. I am not simply disposed to come to believe that samesex
marriage is possible no matter what: whether I come to believe this will depend
on exactly which arguments I encounter, and in which circumstances. My dispositions
just don’t fix my meaning—or at least, not until they are activated in particular
circumstances. (That is why accepting a view can count as a stipulation, even though
it is also a response to an argument.)
The obvious difference between the success of the revisionary analysis of ‘marriage’,
and the failure of the revisionary analysis of ‘woman’ (in the described cases) is
that the successful analysis is accepted and the failed analysis is rejected. I suggest that
this obvious difference is what does the metasemantic work. At least in kind of
simplified case we are considering here (in which the debate is resolved), what makes
a given putative metasemantic analysis successful is that it is accepted.
Further, I suggest that once we have given up the subject-change view (and so
accepted that there a single meaning/concept throughout the discourse), this is an
extremely natural conclusion. We seem to have two possible accounts of what is
going on in simple cases like the ones we are discussing:
Beginning of Debate The facts that fix meaning—including the stipulations and
beliefs that are metasemantic analyticities—must be in place at the beginning of a
discourse. They fix the meanings of our terms and the content of our concepts
throughout the rest of the inquiry. So revisionary analyses always fail; if, at the
beginning of inquiry, we accept “Marriage is the union of one man and one
woman”, then we cannot successfully advocate same-sex “marriage” without
changing the subject.
End of Debate The facts that fix meaning can be determined by the discourse. So
revisionary analyses can succeed; if everyone comes to accept on reasonable
grounds that same-sex marriage is possible, this goes toward making it the case
that ‘marriage’ picks out a relation that can hold between two men or two women.
But surely the End of Debate picture is much to be preferred. It seems absurdly
uncharitable—perverse, really—to maintain that if everyone goes from rejecting the
possibility of same-sex marriage to accepting it (and regarding their prior first-order
    
           
    
    
  55
views as incorrect), they are making a mistake, even if this transition is grounded in
apparently reasonable argument. It looks like we have a choice of preferring our
views prior to inquiry or our views after inquiry: but surely (other things equal) our
views after inquiry are to be preferred. (After all, it is only then that we have had a
chance to consider the evidence.)
Of course, this is not to say that discussion can never go awry, or that we can never
be mistaken or confused. It is only to say that the views of people in a better epistemic
position are ceteris paribus to be preferred to the views of those in a worse epistemic
position.
5.1. Agreeing that a Dispute is Verbal, and Other Complications
We have made simplifying assumptions about the cases we have discussed: that
everyone comes to agree, so that the debate is settled once and for all. And of course
in many cases this kind of assumption will be entirely unrealistic. What predictions
do we make about more realistic cases  One kind complication of we can easily make
sense of. Some debates end not in agreement, but in acknowledgement that the
disputants were talking past each other, so that the debate was merely verbal. We
already mentioned that opponents of same-sex marriage sometimes claim that
proponents are trying to redefine ‘marriage’. Typically (and reasonably, on the
view we are developing) proponents resist this charge. But proponents might also
(and again, reasonably) agree that they are using ‘marriage’ differently, and proceed
to dispute about how the word should be used. In this case, too, I think that the
considered judgments of the parties to the conversation should be taken seriously: if
everyone comes to the conclusion that the subject has changed, that can make it the
case that the subject has in fact changed.
The case where the (first-order) debate is resolved (or perhaps dissolved) when we
agree that we are talking past each other reveals a final data point worth attending to.
In this case, we may re-evaluate our earlier reactions to arguments and judge some of
them to have been confused. To revisit our example from section 1.1, if P has decided
that the dispute about same-sex “marriage” is merely verbal, then P should also
decide that O’s assertion of (1) did not put any pressure on her view. Instead of
arguing against it, she should have rejected it as irrelevant.
As before, an interpretation of the debate should seek to vindicate this considered
judgment. And that is exactly the result we get when we take our end-of-debate
claims to be metasemantically analytic. When we are evaluating (1), for example,
there are three possibilities to consider:
1. If O convinces P—so that O and P end up agreeing that same-sex marriage is by
definition impossible—then the assertion of (1) will seem to have been a good
argument: an argument that bears on the issue, and expresses a reasonable
belief. We vindicate this appearance: the assertion of (1) bears on the issue
because it is inconsistent with the view that P held, and was a reasonable
commitment for someone with O’s view. (If P and O end up agreeing on (1),
it too may end up as a metasemantic analyticity, hence true.)
2. If P convinces O—so that O and P end up agreeing that same-sex marriage is
possible—then the argument will seem flawed. If the assertion were true, it
    
                                              
    
    
  56
would have been relevant (since it is incompatible with P’s position), and
perhaps O had good reason to think it true; but a fuller consideration of the
evidence revealed it to be false. We vindicate this appearance: since there is no
meaning change, the assertion will be relevant—it is inconsistent with P’s
position—but since P’s position is correct, the assertion will turn out to be false.
3. If P and O agree that they are talking past each other, then the argument will
seem irrelevant: either a truth that does not bear on P’s position, or a falsehood
(and an obvious falsehood, given their current evidence). We vindicate this
appearance: since in this scenario the word ‘marriage’ is used with two distinct
meanings in the conversation, there are two relevant interpretations of (1), one
of which is an irrelevant truth and the other of which is a relevant falsehood.
But many typical disputes about revisionary analyses—at least in philosophy—do
not resolve at all: we do not agree, and we do not agree that our dispute is verbal
either. And in this kind of case the considerations we have given so far make no
definite prediction. The basic moral of our story is that facts about our future use can
play a meaning fixing role—can be metasemantically analytic—with respect to our
present use. Exactly how meaning gets determined in any actual case will no doubt be
a complicated matter that requires weighing a variety of factors: facts about past,
present, and future dispositions and uses, as well as (probably) other sorts of facts
about the social and physical environment (which may include facts about metaphysical
naturalness and so on). The view we have developed does not answer every
metasemantic question. It only introduces a new factor to be considered—albeit a
factor that is decisive in many significant cases.
6. Conclusion
This chapter has defended the following claims:
1. Revisionary analysis does not typically involve change of meaning or the
introduction of new concepts.
2. Revisionary analyses can be seen as a kind of (attempted) stipulation, and so as
attempts at giving metasemantic analyticities; but if they are successful, they fix
the meaning of words as we have always used them (even before the stipulation
took place).
These claims together constitute a view that repudiates the idea that philosophy is
purely descriptive—in making judgments, we are also making our meanings and
concepts, not merely “leaving everything as it is”—but at the same time repudiates
the idea that we are changing the subject, or choosing between different concepts.
(Making judgments, forming beliefs, choosing theories  Yes. Conceptual engineering
or conceptual ethics (understood as something other than this)  No.)
Let me conclude by returning to Jackson’s worry: does the stipulation that “a free
action is one such that the agent would have done otherwise if he or she had chosen
to” result in a change of subject that turns “interesting philosophical debates into easy
exercises in deductions from stipulative definitions together with accepted facts” 
Jackson’s worry is not completely unfounded, since it is possible that this stipulation
    
           
    
    
  57
would change the subject; it would change the subject if the parties to the debate treat
it as changing the subject, for example by refusing to engage with first-order
argument for and against it. But philosophers who make this kind of claim do not
usually have this attitude. It is perfectly possible to introduce a particular account of
free action, recognizing it as a stipulation that will have a metasemantic effect if
accepted, but still engaging in interesting philosophical debates. This is exactly what
proponents of revisionary analyses usually do.
So could women be analytically oppressed  Yes: (W) could be metasemantically
analytic. Are they analytically oppressed  That depends on whether proponents of
(W) make a case that convinces us.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to audiences at the Universities of St Andrews and Oslo, to the participants in
Emanuel Viebahn’s seminar at Humboldt University, to the faculty reading group at the
University of Texas at Austin, and to Brice Bantegnie, George Bealer, Liz Camp, Herman
Cappelen, Daniel Elstein, Patrick Greenough, Mark Hinchliff, Gail Leckie, David Plunkett,
Sarah Sawyer, and Kevin Scharp.
References
Ball, D. forthcoming. Relativism, Metasemantics, and the Future. Inquiry. Forthcoming in a
special issue edited by Henry Jackman.
Barker, C. 2002. The Dynamics of Vagueness. Linguistics and Philosophy 25 (1):1–36.
Barker, C. 2013. Negotiating Taste. Inquiry 56 (2–3):240–57.
Bigelow, J. and Schroeter, L. 2009. Jackson’s Classical Model of Meaning. In I. Ravenscroft
(ed.), Minds, Ethics and Conditionals: Themes from the Philosophy of Frank Jackson
(pp. 85–110). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Block, N. 1986. Advertisement for a Semantics for Psychology. Midwest Studies in Philosophy
10:615–678.
Boghossian, P. 1997. Analyticity. In B. Hale and C. Wright (eds.), A Companion to Philosophy
of Language (pp. 331–68). Oxford: Blackwell.
Boghossian, P. 2011. Williamson on the A Priori and the Analytic. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 82:488–97.
Burgess, A., and Plunkett, D. 2013a. Conceptual Ethics I. Philosophy Compass 8 (12):1091–101.
Burgess, A., and Plunkett, D. 2013b. Conceptual Ethics II. Philosophy Compass 8 (12):1102–10.
Carnap, R. 1956. Meaning and Necessity (2nd edn). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dowty, D. R., Wall, R. E., and Peters, S. 1981. Introduction to Montague Semantics. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Fodor, J. A., and Pylyshyn, Z. W. 2015. Minds without Meanings: An Essay on the Content of
Concepts. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Haslanger, S. 2012a. Gender and Race: (What) Are They  (What) Do We Want Them to Be 
(pp. 221–47). Resisting Reality: Social Construction and Social Critique. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Haslanger, S. 2012b. Language, Politics, and ‘The Folk’: Looking for ‘The Meaning’ of ‘Race’
(pp. 429–45). Resisting Reality: Social Construction and Social Critique. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
    
                                              
    
    
  58
Haslanger, S. 2012c. What Good Are Our Intuitions  Philosophical Analysis and Social Kinds.
(pp. 381–405). Resisting Reality: Social Construction and Social Critique. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Jackman, H. 1999. We Live Forwards but Understand Backwards: Linguistic Practices and
Future Behavior. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 80:157–77.
Jackman, H. 2005. Temporal Externalism, Deference, and Our Ordinary Linguistic Practice.
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 86:365–80.
Jackson, F. 1998. From Metaphysics to Ethics: A Defense of Conceptual Analysis. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Kripke, S. A. 1980. Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Montague, R. 1974. English as a Formal Language. Formal Philosophy (pp. 188–221). New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Plunkett, D., and Sundell, T. 2013. Disagreement and the Semantics of Normative and
Evaluative Terms. Philosophers’ Imprint 13 (23):1–37.
Quine, W. V. O. 1953. Two Dogmas of Empiricism. From a Logical Point of View (pp. 20–46).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Quine, W. V. O. 1966a. Carnap and Logical Truth (pp. 100–25). The Ways of Paradox and
Other Essays. New York: Random House.
Quine, W. V. O. 1966b. Truth by Convention (pp. 70–99). The Ways of Paradox and Other
Essays. New York: Random House.
Saul, J. 2006. Philosophical Analysis and Social Kinds: Gender and Race. Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society 106:119–43.
Scharp, K. 2013. Replacing Truth. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schroeter, F., and Schroeter, L. 2009. A Third Way in Metaethics. Nous 43:1–30.
Sundell, T. 2011. Disagreements about Taste. Philosophical Studies 155 (2):267–88.
Sundell, T. 2012. Disagreement, Error, and an Alternative to Reference Magnetism. Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 90 (4):743–59.
Thomasson, A. L. 2016. Metaphysical Disputes and Metalinguistic Negotiation. Analytic
Philosophy 57 (3):1–28.
Williamson, T. 2006. Conceptual Truth. Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 80:1–41.
Williamson, T. 2007. The Philosophy of Philosophy. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. 1953. Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.
    
           

59
3
Minimal Substantivity
Delia Belleri
1. Introduction
Ontological debates may be characterized as disagreements about what there is.
Philosophers debate on whether there are numbers, propositions, universals, species,
genders, and much more. Two of these ontological disputes have sparked significant
controversy in recent years. The first dispute revolves around questions of persistence,
asking how an object can exist through time, undergoing changes while remaining
the same entity. An influential account, called Perdurantism, has it that objects
persist through time by having temporal parts (Armstrong 1980; Lewis 1986;
Heller 1990; Sider 1997). Endurantism, by contrast, rejects the existence of temporal
parts, holding that objects are wholly present at each moment of their existence
(Haslanger 1989; Van Inwagen 1990; Merricks 1994; Wiggins 2001; Fine 2006). The
second debate is about composite material objects and it revolves around the question
whether these objects exist and, if they do, which ones exist. Nihilists hold that
composition never occurs, and that only simples exist (Unger 1979; Wheeler 1979;
Dorr 2005). Universalists, by contrast, hold that it is sufficient for two objects to exist
in order for them to compose something (Lewis 1986; Van Cleve 1986; Armstrong
1997; Rea 1998). Finally, moderatists argue that composition obtains in some cases
and not in others: for instance, only when the parts concur together to form a life, or
when they are otherwise connected (Van Inwagen 1990; Merricks 2001; Markosian
2014; Carmichael 2015).
I will refer to these debates as the Persistence debate and the Composition debate
respectively. Also, although for reasons of space my examples in this chapter will
draw only on the Persistence debate, I submit what I say could apply, modulo relevant
distinctions, to the Composition debate too (I will briefly return to it in section 6).
In metaontology, diverging views about the Composition and Persistence debates
have emerged. Ontological Deflationism holds that these disputes are not substantive.
Some deflationists argue that these are merely terminological discussions, to be
resolved by reaching an agreement about which linguistic expressions belong to
plain English (Hirsch 2005, 2009). Others argue that these disputes involve questions
that are either easily answered within a language, or are otherwise unanswerable
because asked outside of a language (Thomasson 2009, 2015). Other deflationists yet
hold that the competing views are all somehow equivalent (Sidelle 2002; Miller 2005),
where this might be taken to entail that we have too little evidence to choose one
 
  60
ontological view rather than another (see especially Bennett 2009). The opposite
approach may be labelled Ontological Anti-Deflationism, according to which these
ontological disputes are substantive. A pragmatist-naturalist Anti-Deflationism
along the lines dictated by Quine (1948, 1951, 1960) will presumably say that the
Composition and Persistence disputes are substantive insofar as one of the two
options should be recognized as more compatible with our best scientific description
of the world. More radically, a hardcore realist along the lines of Sider (2011) will say
that these disputes are substantive insofar as one of the competing options carves
reality at its joints better than the other.
It is not clear that either of these views satisfactorily accounts for the status of the
Persistence and Composition debates. On the one hand, the deflationist dismissal
does not do justice to the following facts: first, that opting for either of these theories
implies embracing certain commitments about what there is, thus assuming a position
about non-linguistic, worldly facts; second, that each party to the debate can cite
evidence that is sufficient at least by their own lights. On the other hand, embracing a
full-blown Anti-Deflationism may not help either, and the Endurantism-Perdurantism
debate nicely illustrates this point. First, a naturalist option may not be viable, for it is
not clear that, for example, Perdurantism better fits with our current science. Indeed
Sider (2001: 80ff) and Miller (2005: 11013) precisely show that Endurantism can be
formulated in a way that is compatible with special relativity, and is therefore not
inferior to Perdurantism in this respect. Second, a realist position would be supremely
difficult to establish too, since it remains unclear (at least to me) whether it can be
successfully argued that there is conclusive, convincing evidence as to which option is
more joint-carving. With respect to the existence of temporal parts, indeed Sider admits
that he has “no good epistemology of metaphysics to offer” (Sider 2001: xv).
My project in this chapter is that of articulating a position intermediate between
Deflationism and Anti-Deflationism. Specifically, I wish to show that a Minimal
Anti-Deflationism about these debates is defensible, whereby the Composition and
Persistence disputes are minimally substantive. As I will try to outline it, minimal
substantivity is incompatible with kinds of defectiveness like mere verbality and lack
of sufficient evidence; however, at the same time it implies no naturalistic or realistic
commitments. As such, the notion of minimal substantivity could help restore the
ontological respectability of the Composition and Persistence debates, with no need
to submit oneself to much more committal views about what it is for a dispute to be
ontologically substantive.
Before proceeding, I should say something concerning the relationship between
the notion of minimal substantivity that I am about to outline and the main theme of
the present volume—namely, what Burgess and Plunkett (2013) call conceptual ethics
and what Herman Cappelen (2018) calls conceptual engineering. I believe the notion
of minimal substantivity helps explain how and why some debates that are (either
overtly or covertly) about the engineering of some concept are ontologically relevant,
even when these kinds of endeavours do not aim at identifying concepts that are
naturalistically adequate, or let alone joint-carving.¹
¹ For a proposal alternative to mine, see Díaz-León (Chapter 9, this volume).
 
  
  61
The engineering of concepts like G, R, W, B, M may
belong precisely to this category. Indeed, as Barnes (2014: 3378) points out, the
philosopher may even assume from the start that these concepts track social constructions,
where this by no means entails either (i) fundamental joint-carving; or (ii)
reduction to facts described by the natural sciences.² If these enterprises are to be
accepted as still ontologically substantive, the relevant notion of substantivity needs
to be free from the above metaphysical preconceptions. This is where the notion of
minimal substantivity can help: it can shed light on a way in which these tasks of
conceptual engineering can be regarded as ontologically substantive, even when the
purpose of the engineering itself is neither joint-carving nor naturalistic adequacy.
Last, the present contribution may also itself be viewed as an exercise in the
engineering of the concept M S. I realize this concept is far
from belonging to our ordinary repertoire; consequently, I see myself as trying to
articulate a novel notion rather than as trying to ameliorate a pre-existing one. My
hope is that of offering a useful conceptual tool, which will help trace finer-grained
distinctions and sharpen our philosophical understanding of the status of some
disputes about what there is.
2. The Minimum Requirement for Substantivity
As already mentioned in the Introduction, I believe a Minimal Anti-Deflationism is
available in logical space: Ontological disputes are substantive in (at least) a “minimal”,
yet interesting sense. My goal is to bring out, and elaborate on, this sense.
For purely operative purposes, we might begin our inquiry by considering what it
is that we require, at a minimum, from a full-blown substantive dispute. This
consideration will guide us in the process of unearthing and delineating a notion of
minimal substantivity.
It seems to me the minimum necessary (and by no means sufficient) requirement
for a genuinely substantive dispute to obtain is that it is not verbal, that is, such that
the disputants are not simply talking past each other:
[Substantivity] If an ontological dispute is substantive, then it is non-verbal.
With this formulation in mind, let us ask: Do ontological disputes meet this necessary,
minimal criterion for substantivity There is a story, due to Eli Hirsch, according
to which they do not. Hirsch’s view has it that a verbal dispute is such iff each side
ought to agree that, on the most plausibly charitable interpretation, the other side
speaks the truth in its own favoured language (cf. Hirsch 2005, 2008a,b, 2009).³
Let us examine what Hirsch would say with regard to an ontology dispute such as
that between Endurantism and Perdurantism. Suppose that Emma the endurantist
² It could be pointed out that social constructions are the subject of social sciences, which count as
“sciences” in the Quinean methodology. Even conceding this, it would still seem possible to deem these
questions as substantive in a lesser sense. The present proposal offers a way of bypassing such issues of
ranking.
³ Other influential accounts of verbal disputes are offered by Chalmers (2011); Jenkins (2014); and
Balcerak-Jackson (2014).
 
  
  62
utters: “There is a tree in front of us”, while Percy the perdurantist rebuts her claim:
“No, there is a sequence of temporal parts of a tree”. In order for Emma to regard
what Percy says as true, charity requires that she interprets him as speaking a
perdurantist version of English (call it P-English), where “there is” ranges over a
domain of objects that includes temporal parts (this is very rough4 but details can be
glossed over for present purposes). Symmetrically, Percy should interpret Emma as
speaking an endurantist version of English (E-English) where “there is” ranges over
ordinary objects, but not over temporal parts. If this happens, each speaker is uttering
something true in their language, but they are not contradicting each other: the
dispute is merely verbal.
One could question that charity considerations should demand that each side
regards the other as saying something true. After all, regarding the other side as
saying something reasonable (although, for all one knows, false) would seem enough
in the way of honouring charity, and it would not require concluding that the
adversary is speaking a different language.5 So, the proponent of the Hirsch strategy
owes an explanation as to why charity should so heavily insist on attributing to the
interlocutor true, rather than merely rational beliefs.
I think the following argument could be invoked to this end: in general, charity
enjoins us to attribute to our interlocutors the best doxastic state they could find
themselves in given the information available to us.6 Unless there are defeating
considerations, the best such doxastic state is one that involves a reasonable, true
belief. Therefore, if the subject is in a position to regard an interlocutor’s belief as
reasonable and true (and Emma and Percy are in such position), and instead regards
it as merely reasonable, but for all one knows also false, one is not being fully
charitable. If this argument is sound, and unless ontological disputes are shown to
give rise to defeating considerations,7 then assuming Emma and Percy wish to be
fully charitable, they should consider each other as speaking truly in a different
4 There is a complication here: Emma rejects the existence of temporal parts, so it would be incoherent
for her to believe that the quantifier ranges over temporal parts. Addressing this point, Hirsch (2009:
24951) seems to allow that Emma fails to subscribe to a Tarski semantics for P-English, even though she
subscribes to a Tarski semantics for E-English. More accurately, Emma can believe that in her own
language (E-English), truth depends on reference, but need not accept that this holds for every possible
language (including P-English). So Emma can consistently believe that in E-English, the truth of “Fa”
depends on the singular term referring to some object—which cannot be a temporal part, but need not
accept that, in P-English, the truth of “Fa” depends on the singular term referring to an object which could
be a temporal part. She can simply believe that the truth of “Fa” in P-English depends on such-and-such
being the case, where “such-and-such” is a description issued in E-English.
5 Balcerak-Jackson suggests (2012: 17–18) that the endurantist could regard the opponent’s statement as
false in ordinary English because based on a conceptual error, however excusably so, because the matter
under discussion is complex enough that the speaker might have committed a mistake along the way
without losing her rationality (for a similar point, see Horden 2014: 237–8).
6 I take this formulation to be broad enough as to accommodate various ways of spelling out the
principle of charity, as formulated by, among others, Quine, Grandy, Davidson, and Lewis, as well as
Hirsch himself.
7 It could be argued that, if the cost of regarding the opponent as having a true and reasonable belief is
positing a linguistic difference, this cost constitutes a defeating consideration. But it is not obvious to me
that the cost in the case of Emma and Percy is so high as to defeat the requirement for full charity. The issue
is at best debatable.
 
  
  63
version of English, where “there is” has a different sense. Therefore, ontological
disputes seem doomed to be diagnosed as verbal.
In light of these considerations, what could be done in order to save the nonverbality
of ontological disputes The only way of securing a disagreement seems to
“move one level up”, so to speak: that is to say, to regard the dispute as taking place at
the metalinguistic level, and thus regard the parties as advocating each a different
“idiolect” as the idiolect that is best to use in that philosophical context. Hirsch seems
to hint at similar considerations. Addressing Sider’s idea that ontologists can speak
Ontologese, Hirsch writes:
My advice is that [the philosophers who purport to speak Ontologese] should stick to the metalevel
and engage in disputes about which sentences are true in the philosophically best language,
rather than attempting to speak that best language. (2008b: 520, my italics)
In order to secure a non-verbal conflict, moving the dispute at the metalinguistic level
would seem to be a viable option. Indeed, this suggestion gains support from
some recent developments in the meta-philosophical literature. David Plunkett and
Timothy Sundell (cf. Sundell 2011; Plunkett and Sundell 2013; Plunkett 2015) have
recently maintained that a great number of philosophical disputes which look merely
terminological are instead covertly metalinguistic and concern “a distinctive normative
question—how best to use a word relative to a context” (2013: 3). Plunkett and
Sundell contend that this metalinguistic, normative question is not overtly expressed,
but it is pragmatically communicated, so that the metalinguistic character of the
exchange may not be immediately recognizable. Following Plunkett and Sundell’s
lead, more than one author has proposed to interpret at least some philosophical
disputes as being covertly metalinguistic: Megan Wallace (MS) focuses on
ontological debates about ordinary material objects, while Amie Thomasson (2016)
considers debates about composition, essence, identity, and persistence, but also
disputes about what art is, about free will and determinism, and about the existence
of races. In light of what these authors propose, Hirsch’s suggestion could be
honoured by envisaging the possibility that these disputes be explicitly formulated
in metalinguistic terms, thus moving to what Plunkett and Sundell (2013: 67) and
Plunkett (2015: 836) would call a “canonical dispute”, centred on a literally expressed
disagreement about a metalinguistic, normative question.
Going back to the exchange between Emma the endurantist and Percy the
perdurantist, the friend of metalinguistic disputes could say that, although the two
disputants would seem engaged in a first-order communication about whether or not
there are temporal parts, what they are really doing is negotiating the sense of “there
is”. This opens up the possibility of making the metalinguistic conflict explicit: In the
newly conceived dispute, Emma would be overtly advocating an endurantist (commonsensical)
sense of the term, which allows one to existentially quantify over trees,
tables, and mountains but not over temporal parts; and Percy would be overtly
advocating a perdurantist sense of “there is”, which permits existential quantification
over all these objects plus their temporal parts.
Let us therefore assume that it is possible to recast first-level ontological disputes as
metalinguistic debates. This move has a problematic consequence which needs to be
dealt with: once the disagreement has moved at the metalinguistic level, it is not
 
  
  64
ontological any longer: it is about language, or at least about which semantics for a
given language should be chosen. This seems to have little to do with ontological
substantivity! What should we say, then, in order to preserve the idea that these are
ontologically interesting disputes—at least to a minimal degree
3. Rescuing the Ontological Significance
of Metalinguistic Disputes
In this section, I aim to show that, even if the only non-verbal disputes on matters of
persistence (or composition) were metalinguistic ones, not all hopes are lost for those
who wish to rescue the “minimal substantivity” of these disputes. This is because the
selection of certain linguistic options would seem to enjoin a certain degree of
ontological commitment once the choice is made. Discussing the best linguistic
resources for doing ontology may therefore have downstream ontological implications,
to the extent that it may lead us to subscribing to certain ontological
commitments.
3.1. First-Order Issues and Ontological Commitments
Maintaining the focus on persistence debates, in what follows I wish to show that
some central arguments that have been proposed by supporters of perdurantism can
be reformulated as metalinguistic proposals to introduce some piece of terminology,
for example “temporal part”, where this should sanction an ontological commitment
to temporal parts. These newly reformulated arguments may be regarded as starting
with problems that arise at the first order, that is, where language is used to talk about
the existence of objects and their properties through time, and as advancing a
metalinguistic proposal so as to obviate to these first-order problems. The purpose
of these reconstructions is demonstrative: my aim is to show that it is possible to look
at specific arguments offered in the literature in the material mode, as it were, in a
new metalinguistic light. The reader who already got the gist of the strategy may
safely skip the examples.
To start with, we may choose the problem of temporary intrinsics. The first-order
problematic statement that needs philosophical consideration may be rendered as
follows: “If a certain object o changes by being F at a certain moment t and
subsequently being not-F at t + 1, then o has incompatible properties at different
times; if this is so, then o at t is not identical with o at t + 1.” David Lewis’ (1986)
proposal, at the metalinguistic level, could be phrased as follows: let us introduce the
notion of “temporal part”. Once we do this, our way of talking at the object-level
changes: it is no longer one and the same object o to which we ascribe the incompatible
properties of being F and being not-F; it is two numerically distinct temporal
parts of o, call them temp-1 and temp-2.
As a second example, we may consider the case of arbitrary undetached parts. At
the object level, the predicament to be dealt with may be thus expressed: “If Descartes
is deprived of a leg at t, he then becomes (say) Descartes-minus. Now, it seems that
Descartes-minus before t is the same as Descartes-minus after t; also, Descartes after t
is the same as Descartes-minus after t; and also, that Descartes is the same before and
 
  
  65
after t; it would then follow that Descartes-minus before t is the same as Descartes
before t. But this is not the case.” The solution proposed by Heller (1990) could be
stated as follows at the metalinguistic level. If we introduce the term “temporal part”,
then at the object-language level there is no tension between the following statements:
“The temporal part of Descartes-minus after t and the temporal part of
Descartes after t are the same”; and “The temporal part of Descartes-minus before
t and the temporal part of Descartes before t are not the same”.
As a last example, let us pick the argument from vagueness in defence of Perdurantism.
Here is the problematic inference that needs philosophical attention. If
objects gradually go out of existence, it is vague whether they form diachronic
units—that is, units that start and cease to exist. This is unacceptable, for it would
entail that existence is vague, while existence as expressed through the logical
vocabulary is not vague. Sider (1997, 2001) offers a response which, at the metalinguistic
level, could look like this: if we introduce the notion “temporal part” and if we
subscribe to unrestricted composition, we avoid vague existence, and consequently
also indeterminate statements at the object-language level. For now whatever diachronic
sum of temporal parts we consider is a genuine composite object with clearcut
temporal boundaries.
It is important to note that, at least for the advocates of Perdurantism, acceptance
of the term introduced seems to imply an ontological commitment to temporal parts,8
at least in the sense of supposing that temporal parts are in the domain of one’s
existential quantifier (Quine 1948: 32; 1960: 242). For it would be odd to just talk in
terms of temporal parts, while at the same time denying that there are temporal parts.
The best way for avoiding ontological commitment to temporal parts would be to
expunge the term “temporal part” from one’s terminology (e.g., by paraphrasing it
away); but since the proponents of Perdurantism do exactly the opposite, it seems
safe to say that term introduction also marks (and should mark) an ontological
commitment to temporal parts.
To be sure, the perdurantist could introduce talk of temporal parts as a useful
fiction, where this would indeed imply just speaking in terms of temporal parts while
denying that there are any temporal parts. Although this option is available, this is
importantly not what authors who identify as perdurantists either do or should do, if
anything because the ensuing position could not ultimately count as a form of bona
fide Perdurantism, but would rather count as a form of nominalism about temporal
parts. Otherwise put, if Perdurantists wish to hold a position that they could
legitimately describe as realism (of some form), a fictionalist move would simply be
a non-starter.
8 It is perhaps not fully accurate to say that the whole question at stake in a metalinguistic ontological
dispute on “temporal part” is just whether or not we should introduce the term “temporal part”. For if this
were the case, then it seems that by merely conceding that one could introduce the term “temporal part”,
the endurantist would be committed to temporal parts. To avoid this result, the question at stake should be
made more precise, for instance: “Should one introduce the term «temporal part», where this implies that
one wishes to quantify over certain entities, thereby ontologically committing to them” (Thanks to
Richard Woodward for stressing this point.)
 There are also motivation issues. Notice the contrast between a version of Perdurantism that expects to
be fictionalist from the outset and standard fictionalist proposals in other domains. Standard
 
  
  66
There is an additional element regarding the commitments following from a
certain linguistic proposal. When two metalinguistic proposals enter into conflict,
it seems reasonable to expect that the proposal which eventually prevails in the
dispute (if any) will imply some ontological commitments for all the disputants. Thus
for instance, were the perdurantist to “win” the dispute, this would imply a commitment
for all parties to use “there is” in such a way as to quantify over temporal parts.
This would have various implications about which statements are evaluated as true or
false among the parties: for instance, a statement of “Yesterday’s temporal part of this
tree is not the same as today’s temporal part” would now be considered as true. By
contrast, were the endurantist to “win” the dispute, it seems that the existential
quantifier would have to be used by all parties in such a way as to not quantify
over temporal parts, and statements like “This tree is the same as yesterday’s tree”
would consequently be deemed true.
It therefore seems that the ontological import of the metalinguistic dispute comes
from the joint contribution of two factors. The first is that introducing certain
linguistic expressions (like “temporal part”) would seem to imply an ontological
commitment to certain objects for the proponents of the linguistic introduction. The
second is that a resolution of the dispute in favour of one option or another would
seem capable to affect the ontological commitments of all the parties to the dispute.
If these considerations are sound, we now seem to have a first-pass proposal
regarding a sufficient condition for the obtaining of minimal substantivity in ontological
disputes:
[Minimal Substantivity-1] An ontological dispute is minimally substantive if it is
linked with a metalinguistic, non-verbal dispute whose resolution can affect the
parties’ ontological commitments.
It should be stressed that being ontologically committed to, say, temporal parts need
not mean believing, for instance, that “temporal part” refers to temporal parts in any
robust sense, or that temporal parts are objects in any inflated, heavyweight sense. There
are ways of conceiving reference and objecthood that are sufficiently deflationary so as
to guarantee that ontological commitment stays suitably deflationary too.
For instance, one may have a sufficiently broad notion of reference which not only
implies that it is a language-world relation, but also that it could obtain when certain
intra-language relations obtain. According to this less demanding notion, reference
need not obtain only when an object is picked out by a certain term t, but it could also
obtain when the sentence S containing a certain term t is considered equivalent to
hermeneutical Fictionalism, for example, concerns linguistic practices that are already in place, from talk
about numbers (Yablo 2002: 87) to talk about ordinary objects (Rosen and Dorr 2002: 171). An important
motivation for the view seems to be that since we cannot get rid of these already established practices, we
need a way of salvaging as much as possible of a set of linguistic usages that are otherwise regarded as
metaphysically and semantically confused. The practice proposed by a fictionalist perdurantist would,
however, be a new one. The purpose of legitimizing a defective practice that we cannot get rid of would be
utterly absent. This seems to deprive the fictionalist perdurantist of an important motivation that is
commonly associated with standard forms of fictionalism. One could then wonder what the motivation
for going fictionalist from the outset could be: why not be a conventionalist, or a deflationist realist, about
temporal parts (Thanks to Alexis Burgess and David Plunkett for prompting me to clarify these issues).
 
  
  67
another sentence S* that does not contain t and that is deemed true. Following this
strategy, the perdurantist might say that, if the sentence: “An object o is F at time t1”
is true, the sentence: “The t1-temporal part of o is F” is true too and hence, the term
“temporal part” refers. The latter proposal would amount to a deflationary approach
to the reference of terms like “temporal part” along Neo-Fregean lines (cf. Hale and
Wright 2001, 2009).¹°
Analogously, one need not believe that temporal parts are objects in any robust
sense—for example, instantaneous or even just very short-lived spatio-temporal
objects.¹¹ Indeed, the perdurantist may presume right from the start that temporal
parts are to be considered objects in a more deflationary sense. For instance, she
could say that a temporal part is an object in the “covering” sense of the term
individuated by Thomasson (2007, 2009, 2015), in that from the sentence “Today’s
temporal part of this tree is blossoming” it is possible to infer “Something is
blossoming” where “something” plays the role of a dummy sortal.
Of course, whether or not the perdurantist will be happy with this minimal set-up
will depend on her stance with relation to what reference and objecthood amount to.
However, it seems entirely possible and not ad hoc to opt for a combination of
ontological commitment plus deflationary reference and objecthood, and still be
considered as somebody who engages in a dispute that has some ontological significance.
Otherwise put: it seems possible, and not ad hoc or let alone inconsistent, for
someone to accept: (i) that the dispute about temporal parts has a minimal ontological
significance insofar as it concerns the selection of a language from which
certain ontological commitments are to be extracted; and (ii) that reference to
temporal parts themselves, or that the kind of objects they are, are construed in a
deflationary fashion.
So far, I have argued in what sense metalinguistic proposals—such as that of
introducing the term “temporal part”—may have an ontological significance, for
they might create an ontological commitment as a result of the dispute. The ontological
commitment can be formulated in a sense that is (i) minimal enough as to
exclude robust views of reference and objecthood; but still (ii) sufficient for ensuring
that the proposal has some ontological import.
3.2. Resisting Two Attempts at Downplaying the Proposal
One way in which this proposal may be downplayed is by arguing as follows: the
metalinguistic negotiations considered so far are disagreements that only obtain
between philosophers. Some of the competing linguistic options could at best
imply ontological commitments for a few, initiated ontologists (e.g., the commitment
¹° It is also possible to follow other deflationary accounts of reference: Horwich’s (1998) view would
have it that the term refers so long as the meaning of “temporal part” is constituted by certain use-features,
and the expression occurs in instances of a disquotational schema like: “(x) (<n> refers to x iff x = n)”. Field
(1994: 261–3), would presumably emphasize the term’s computational role; Brandom (1994: 360–70)
would stress the expression’s inferential role and the substitution patters in which it enters; while Burgess
(2015) suggests that, in an inferentialist framework, a term refers if it occurs in a simple atomic truth.
¹¹ One could have qualms with instantaneous objects (as noted by Fine 2006: 700), or with short-lived
temporal parts (like my temporal part between October 1, 2016, and October 2, 2016), on account that
physical objects like these could not “pop in and out of existence”.
 
  
  68
to temporal parts). Given what Eli Hirsch calls “the lack of authority that philosophers
have in our culture” (Hirsch 2008a: 181), it seems that some of the competing
options could not make it out of the “ontology room” and be absorbed into
ordinary usage. This seems to significantly reduce the interest of minimal substantivity,
because even if the dispute produced a change in ontological commitments,
these may well remain confined within the narrow conversational setting of a few
academic specialists. In response to this downplaying attempt, let me try to more
precisely pin down the connection between the philosophers’ (metalinguistic) dispute
and the broader ontological “language games” practised in ordinary language.
To start with, it seems uncontentious that, when we think and talk about what
there is—in both ordinary life and in philosophy—we engage in “language games”¹²
which feature certain types of expressions and certain rules about how to use those
expressions. These linguistic resources mainly consist of the quantificational apparatus,
the numerals, the identity sign, plus nouns, predicates, and variables. There is
therefore an undeniable continuity between the linguistic resources employed by the
ontologist and the linguistic resources employed in order to talk about what there is
in ordinary contexts.
Now, the language game of talking about the existence of temporal parts is one that
almost exclusively philosophers engage in; however, nothing prevents that, at least in
principle, the linguistic usages established by the philosophical discussion “leak” into
(some fragments of ) the ordinary language, thus affecting the ontological commitments
and interpretations of the relevant key vocabulary. Note that this does not
require us to imagine a world where philosophers have authority over ordinary
linguistic usages; it only requires to imagine a world where the uses in the ontology
room causally contribute to a change (or consolidation, where applicable) of ordinary
language games about what there is. This seems like a much less demanding scenario
than the one Hirsch seems to expect to obtain. As to the contention that the notion of
minimal substantivity is not interesting enough because the link with ordinary
linguistic practices is too feeble, I will not pursue the issue further, partly because it
is not clear what “interesting” in this context might exactly mean, partly because
it seems to me obvious that there is at least one sense in which this notion is
interesting enough, given appropriate aims and purposes.
There is another way in which [Minimal Substantivity-1] might be downplayed,
this time linked to a specifically (Neo)-Carnapian way of portraying the role of
language in ontology. The potential worry could be illustrated with an example
drawn from Amie Thomasson’s work. Thomasson finds it objectionable that there
may be more than one sense of the existential quantifier—a joint-carving sense in
addition to its standard, first-order predicate logic sense (conferred by introduction
and elimination rules). If the existential quantifier only has one sense, then any
sentence purportedly formulated with the other sense of the quantifier would be
semantically defective, either because it has no clear meaning or because it is
straightforwardly false (Thomasson 2015: 317; 2016: 89). So, even if the dispute
¹² The expression “language games” is simply meant to designate rule-governed practices of language
use; it should not be understood as a way of endorsing Wittgensteinian ideas on meaning or rule-following.
 
  
  69
eventually led (or seemed to have led) to a change in ontological commitments, the
only parties uttering semantically acceptable sentences at the first-level would be the
parties that stick to the standard semantics of the quantifier. The parties deviating
from such standard semantics would be committing a form of semantic mistake. In
this case, any such dispute would be a disappointment: for only one party could ever
be right, because only one party would be upholding the semantics of English.
If the focus is restricted to the semantics of the existential quantifier, Thomasson
may have her reasons to look unfavourably at the notion of minimal substantivity,
which I will not discuss here. However, she need not reject that metalinguistic
negotiation might concern other kinds of expressions, for example nouns like
“table”, “number”, “person”, “corporation”, or “marriage”. In particular, she may
well accept that metalinguistic negotiation is sometimes needed in order to clarify or
precisely determine the conditions of application of a certain term, or to change them
so as to overcome a number of semantic flaws. In Thomasson’s own words:
Conceptual work needn’t be simply explicative: . . . at times we may have work to do to
determine how best to fill in the details of our concept of ‘same person’ or ‘same work of
art’, consistent with some (ethical, aesthetic, or pragmatic) purpose. Conceptual work is also
involved in determining whether tacit contradictions or incoherencies beset parts of our
conceptual scheme. . . . Ontologists may also be engaged in what Carnap would have called
‘conceptual engineering’: revising or devising systems of categories to help them better serve
some practical purpose. (Thomasson 2015: 3278)
It is compatible with this picture that, sometimes, a disagreement may arise concerning
the rules of application of a certain term; or concerning whether or not a new
term (with application rules to be fully worked out) should be introduced in the
linguistic framework used to talk about matters ontological. If ontological commitments
would flow from the adoption of these terms—for instance via analytic
entailments, in accordance with her own account (Thomasson 2007: 167; 2015:
14558)—then it seems that if the dispute could lead to a change or establishment
of ontological commitments, the dispute would be minimally substantive after all,
even in Thomasson’s framework. Therefore, setting aside her reservations on the
semantics of the existential quantifier, minimal substantivity turns out to be compatible
with the set-up proposed by Thomasson, at least for some expressions.
To be sure, Thomasson may still not accept that the ontological commitments
extracted from a certain framework be understood in terms of “robust” notions of
existence, reference, and object; they would rather have to be understood along
deflationary lines. Still, it seems that [Minimal-Substantivity-1] is sufficiently schematic
and independent of considerations of ontological robustness in order for it to
be effortlessly imported into her Neo-Carnapian account. As it turns out, then,
Thomasson’s views need not be hostile to the notion of minimal ontological
substantivity.
In general, the schematic character of [Minimal-Substantivity-1] makes it compatible
with several ways in which ontological commitment could be cashed out,
ranging from “robust” to “deflationary”. We could therefore say that [Minimal-
Substantivity-1] is compatible with various ways of being a realist, ranging from
hard-line approaches whereby certain objects or facts are taken as ontologically
 
  
  70
“thick” and wholly language- or mind-independent, to minimal approaches where
their existence is “thin” and often tied to semantic considerations. Such approaches
can be held not only with regard to material objects, temporal parts or mathematical
entities, but also with regard to—for example—moral properties and facts, and in
general in normative domains where realism can assume the nuances just outlined.
Meta-ethics provides an example here, for one can either be a robust realist about
moral properties and facts; or one can be a “minimal realist” who confines herself to
claiming that moral discourse is truth-apt and by-and-large true, where this gives rise
to no inflationary views about the nature of moral properties or facts. As Gideon
Rosen puts it, “the minimal realist holds that in a thin and metaphysically unambitious
sense, the doctrine correctly represents . . . a genuine domain of fact: at least
some of the objects the discourse posits really exist, and the corresponding singular
terms refer . . . ” (Rosen 1994: 281). If what I have argued is right, [Minimal Substantivity-
1] serves the minimal and non-minimal moral realist equally well.
To conclude this section, I have argued that metalinguistic disputes related to
certain ontological matters (like persistence or composition) can be considered as
“minimally substantive”. The metalinguistic proposals in play (as, for example, that
of introducing talk about temporal parts) imply a certain degree, no matter how
minimal or deflationary, of ontological commitment, so minimal substantivity has to
do with the potential the dispute has to affect the parties’ ontological commitments.
Two attempts at downplaying minimal substantivity have also been deflected, by (i)
pointing out that the dispute could in principle affect the ontological commitments
underlying ordinary language games and (ii) showing that the notion of minimal
substantivity is compatible with metalinguistic negotiation within a (Neo)-Carnapian
set-up.
4. Rescuing the Epistemic Significance
of Metalinguistic Disputes
The deflationist could concede that the metalinguistic disputes associated with the
Persistence and Composition debates comply with [Minimal Substantivity-1]. Yet,
she could insist, the disagreement suffers from another kind of defectiveness, one
whereby we do not have enough evidence to choose between one linguistic option
and the other—for example, between E-English and P-English. This position is
dubbed by Karen Bennett (2009: 73) Epistemicism.
I will now reconstruct a potential epistemicist argument that may apply to the
metalinguistic negotiation between P-English and E-English (Bennett’s version concerns
the very theories, like Endurantism and Perdurantism). The epistemicist about
the metalinguistic dispute between E-English and P-English could say, first of all, that
neither of the two languages seems to guarantee greater simplicity. The perdurantist
will obviously have to increase the complexity in her language by adopting the term
“temporal part”. However, the endurantist will also complicate her language by
turning monadic predicates like “being blue” into polyadic predicates like “being
blue-tly”. Therefore, it is not clear who wins on the front of simplicity. Second, it is
not clear that the perdurantist’s linguistic innovations help completely and uniformly
 
  
  71
to solve Endurantism’s problems. Recall that the endurantist struggles with
co-location, in that her account leaves it open whether, in the Lump-Statue case,
there are two objects or just one. The standard worm-theory perdurantist claims to
solve the problem by saying that the temporally extended lump and the temporally
extended statue share some temporal parts, exactly like two roads can share a stretch
of road (Sider 2001: 153). However, we could imagine that the statue and the lump
are created and destroyed at the same times (Gibbard 1975: 191), where this revives
the puzzle for the perdurantist as well: are there two temporally extended objects or
just one (cf. Magidor 2016: 524) Provided this line of argument could go through,
absence of sufficient grounds to select one option as opposed to the other would
undermine the significance of the dispute.
In arguing against this epistemic criticism, I will assume that there are two angles
from which to look at a dispute: one is the “external” angle, to be identified with the
bird-eye perspective of the neutral onlooker. This is the perspective of someone
who accepts that, in adjudicating between different languages (like E-English or
P-English) that are associated with ontological theories (Endurantism and Perdurantism),
we should keep in mind that a number of “theoretical virtues” ought to be
honoured—like simplicity or explanatory power. However, one has no determinate
views as to which virtues should take priority, thus remaining somewhat “neutral” or
“open-minded”. The other perspective is the “internal” one, to be identified with the
point of view of an engaged participant to the dispute. This the perspective of
someone who, for instance, has clear views about which theoretical virtues should
take priority when adjudicating between E-English as the language of Endurantism
and P-English as the language of Perdurantism. For instance, one may believe that
ontological simplicity/parsimony should be maximized even if this meant increasing
ideological complexity.
Having distinguished between the “external” and “internal” perspective, one may
grant to the epistemicist that, from the “external” point of view, evidence does not
favour any of the linguistic options, because they all stand on a par with respect to a
number of features. However, it seems to me plausible that from the “internal”
perspective, there will often be some admissible consideration that appears conclusively
to favour one particular choice.¹³ For instance, the endurantist may concede
that she has to make her predicates more complicated, but also consider that as a
bearable cost at least if she is a nominalist about properties. The cost of complicating
the predicates may be outweighed by the benefits of not introducing terms that imply
commitments to new objects—like temporal parts. Avoidance of a certain object-talk
may therefore count as a sufficient reason to adopt E-English, at least relative to these
theoretical considerations.
Also, all participants to the dispute would seem to be entitled to the theoretical
considerations they favour, provided these are admissible by the lights of the
¹³ I am saying “often” and not “always” (or, let alone, “necessarily”), because cases should be allowed
where these admissible considerations are lacking, and there is therefore no internal justification. Absent
internal justification, the subject would therefore not be fully rational in believing her favoured theory.
Presumably, in this case the subject should suspend judgement, or believe with a very low credence.
 
  
  72
philosophical community’s standards, and are not merely idiosyncratic motivations.
So, the perdurantist would seem to be entitled to her preference for the
ontologically committal idiom of temporal parts, if, for example, maintaining a
monadic conception of temporary intrinsic properties is more important for her;
for such a ranking of preferences would count as an admissible consideration.
Analogously, the endurantist seems entitled to a more complicated ideology, if she
is willing to trade that with a smaller, temporal-parts free ontology; for this too
strikes as an admissible consideration. If all parties are entitled to such preferences,
then if their views honour them, believing these views will be justified at least
relative to the adopted perspective. Their views would therefore enjoy an “internal”
type of justification. (A further question, which I cannot settle here, is whether
“internal” justification has any interesting relation with truth-conduciveness. In
Belleri (2017) I argue that it does).
So far, we have simply argued that the internal perspective is available besides
the external one. Now we need to be convinced that the external perspective is
not relevant in the assessment of ontological disputes. The epistemicist seems to
assume exactly this, so countering this thesis may constitute a strategy for
undermining her case. I wish to suggest that recognizing the internal perspective
allows a more charitable reconstruction of the epistemic status of the debate, and
should then be preferred to the external perspective. So for instance, countenancing
the internal perspective allows one to say that each party to the debate has
sufficient justification (of the internal kind) to believe their view, while the
external perspective would view them as insufficiently justified, tout court. Furthermore,
according to the internal approach, the considerations each party
invokes in favour of their view offer epistemic support to it at least relative to
their own perspective. By contrast, in the external approach, the reasons invoked
by the parties could not count as conclusive even from each party’s own point of
view. In virtue of the greater charity afforded by the internal approach, and
assuming that ceteris paribus an account that maximizes charity is to be preferred,
I then conclude we should deem the internal approach more relevant than
the external approach.
The upshot, then, is that even if metalinguistic ontological disputes were faced with
the threat of “external ungroundedness” posed by Bennett’s Epistemicism, as long as
each of the linguistic options could be seen as internally, conclusively justified, these
metalinguistic disputes would not be completely epistemically deflatable, in that it
would not be possible to claim that we lack sufficient justification tout court to believe
any side.
In light of the foregoing considerations, we should qualify the sufficient condition
spelled out in [Minimal Substantivity-1] by making it a conjunction of two conditions,
one about the dispute’s potential for language-change and the other about the
non-epistemic deflatability of the dispute.
[Minimal Substantivity-2] An ontological dispute is minimally substantive if (a)
it is linked with a metalinguistic, non-verbal dispute whose resolution can affect
the parties’ ontological commitments; and (b) the latter dispute is not epistemically
deflatable.
 
  
  73
5. Dispelling a Threat of Excessive Proliferation
It could be objected that [Minimal Substantivity-2] generates way too many minimally
substantive ontological disputes. Suppose Carla argues that there are such things
as “Schmartinis”, which come into existence whenever an alcoholic drink is served in
a V-shaped glass, while Farida rejects this existential claim. What should we say
about this case¹4
Suppose for the sake of the argument that there are sufficient grounds for
believing that Carla and Farida are having a metalinguistic dispute. At first sight,
it may seem that the objector is right: in principle, this dispute could affect the
parties’ ontological commitments, and Carla could be internally justified, if she
provided admissible (not excessively idiosyncratic) considerations to which justification
could be relativized. The dispute would then be minimally substantive: a
rather unpalatable consequence.
The problem with this objection is that it trades on an underdescribed scenario.
What we learn from the Schmartini case is that it seems wrong to call “minimally
substantive” a dispute that, because of the very few details offered by the objector,
seems to arise out of nowhere, seems not motivated by the need to solve a
specific problem, and where no immediately recognizable valuable consequence
seems to result from the prevailing of any of the options at stake. However, it
seems obvious that all these elements should normally be specified. So it seems
disingenuous to base the objection on an abnormally underdescribed case and
not on a normally, adequately described case, in which it would indeed be
possible to appreciate why, for example, Carla and Farida are having the
Schmartini dispute in the first place, what problem they are trying to solve,
and what benefits they pursue with their respective claims. If all these elements
were specified, I am confident that the verdict as to the dispute’s minimal
substantivity would greatly differ.
Of course, it is open to the critic to find an example in which all the details are
specified and still it is counter-intuitive to call the exchange minimally substantive.
My expectation would be that (i) either the specified details make the dispute so silly
and idiosyncratic that (at least) one of the two conditions contained in [Minimal
Substantivity-2] is not met; or (ii) the specified details make the dispute reasonable
enough as to turn out as minimally substantive.
The overgeneration charge contained in the Schmartini objection therefore reveals
what seems to be a background condition that has to be satisfied in order for the
elements spelled out in [Minimal Substantivity-2] to suffice for minimal substantivity:
that the dispute occurs in a sufficiently rich context, where the rationale, aims,
and prospective benefits of the dispute can be clearly identified. Luckily for us, we can
specify all of these ingredients in the case of ontological disputes, as well as in
countless other philosophical and non-philosophical cases.
¹4 Thanks to Esa Díaz-León for discussion on this point.
 
  
  74
6. Conclusion: Minimal Anti-Deflationism
The characterization encoded in [Minimal Substantivity-2] could be adopted to spell
out a minimal form of Anti-Deflationism about some, if not all, ontological disputes.
The position is formulated in the following way:
[Minimal Anti-Deflationism] Some (if not all) ontological disputes are minimally
substantive, because even if the dispute at the first-level is verbal, it can be
linked to an explicitly metalinguistic dispute such that: (a) it could affect the
parties’ ontological commitments; and (b) it is not epistemically deflatable.
As I have shown, as long as there is sufficient evidence that the Endurantism-
Perdurantism debate is a metalinguistic negotiation in the sense coined by Plunkett
and Sundell (2013), we could move from an implicit, merely pragmatically conveyed
negotiation to an explicit disagreement, which Plunkett and Sundell would call a
“canonical dispute”, about whether or not to employ certain linguistic items. If it is
true (a) that this dispute could in principle affect our ontological commitments; and
(b) that it is not epistemically deflatable, then the dispute is minimally substantive.
As hinted at in the Introduction, similar remarks apply, I submit, to the dispute
between the views competing in the Composition debate, involving such positions
as Nihilism, Universalism, Common-Sense ontologies, Organicism, and so on.
Although further work will have to be done in order to substantiate this claim, it is
already possible to offer a “preview” of how Minimal Anti-Deflationism could be
applied to the aforementioned dispute.
To illustrate, consider a supporter of common-sense ontology declaring “There are
composite objects (such as chairs, trees, mountains)”; a nihilist replies: “There are no
composite objects”. Suppose it were conceded that the commonsensical theorist is
uttering something true in plain English, where the domain of the existential
quantifier ranges over ordinary objects; while the domain of quantification of the
nihilist were restricted to simples (e.g., subatomic particles). The two contenders
would therefore be using two different senses of “there is”, call them “there isc” and
“there isn”. Suppose one could successfully argue that this dispute be interpreted as a
metalinguistic negotiation, where the parties are pragmatically communicating their
advocacy of “there isc” and “there isn” respectively. It would then be easy to recast the
dispute as an explicit metalinguistic negotiation, where the commonsensical theorist
were proposing to use “there isc” and the nihilist were proposing to use “there isn”
when discussing matters of composition.
At this stage, the proponent of Minimal Anti-Deflationism about the Composition
debate may argue that this dispute: (a) could affect the parties’ ontological
commitments concerning parthood and material composition. For instance, were
the nihilistic version of English to prevail, this could result in the parties’ withdrawing
their commitment to the existence of tables and chairs. Additionally, it
could be urged that (b) the dispute is not epistemically deflatable, because each
party enjoys at least an internal form of justification. Successfully arguing for (a)
and (b) would imply that the dispute in question is minimally substantive. Although
many details will have to be filled in, this brief outline already shows that a Minimal
 
  
  75
Anti-Deflationist project can be sensibly pursued in the Composition case as well as
in the Persistence case.
Before closing, we should go back to the question “What can the notion of minimal
substantivity do for conceptual engineers” As I anticipated, the notion of minimal
substantivity can help clarify what is ontologically substantive in disputes where
parties need not be engaged in “tracking” any fundamental aspect of reality, nor need
to pursue a naturalistic project.
For instance, we might say that a debate on whether there are (or there can be)
same-sex marriages is ontologically substantive in a relevant, “minimal” sense,
although marriage-facts are not fundamental or are not naturalizable. Provided we
have enough evidence suggesting that the dispute is a metalinguistic negotiation, we
may argue that: (a) debating over whether we should use the expression “same-sex
marriage” can affect our ontological commitments (to types of marriages) and the
language games we play when we speak about what there is and what there is not,
especially with regard to marital unions (actually, these disputes have already
contributed to a massive change in the relevant language games. So the possibility
claim is easily ascertained to be true.) As to condition (b): it is arguable that the
dispute is not epistemically deflatable either since, contra the epistemicist, there is
indeed sufficient evidence to favour one linguistic option rather than another. For
instance, it seems that numerous arguments drawing on normative considerations,
sociological studies, reports, and so on, favour use of the word “marriage” to denote
same-sex couples as well as heterosexual ones. Similar considerations arguably apply
to several other ontological or metaphysical disputes on matters that are neither
“metaphysically fundamental” in Sider’s favoured sense nor obviously naturalizable
in the Quinean sense, including disputes about G, W, R, B,
R, S H, and so on.
Last, I should stress that labelling these disputes “minimally substantive” should
not be understood in a demeaning sense, but simply as signalling that the dispute is
substantive in a way that requires no naturalistic or realistic assumptions. If you do
not like the word “minimally”, you could say that the dispute is “non-naturalistically
ontologically substantive” or that it is “ontologically-committing substantive”. In
general, the idea of minimal substantivity should be compatible with a dispute being
highly important and worth pursuing for cultural, civil, ethical, or political reasons.
It seems like the notion I have been delineating can fulfil this task.
Acknowledgements
This chapter was presented at the Conceptual Engineering Workshop held at the University of
Oslo in June 2016. I am grateful to the organizers, Alexis Burgess, Herman Cappelen, and
David Plunkett, for involving me in the project, as well as to the audience for their helpful
comments, especially Tim Sundell, Patrick Greenough, David Braddon-Mitchell, Esa Díaz-
León, Torfinn Huvenes, Matti Eklund, and Derek Ball. Thanks also to Julia Zakkou, Richard
Woodward, David Plunkett, and Alexis Burgess for their feedback on the final draft. Work on
the final version of this chapter was funded by the Humboldt Foundation, which allowed
me collaborate with the DFG Emmy Noether Research Group “Ontology After Quine”
(WO-1896/1-1) led by Richard Woodward at the University of Hamburg.
 
  
  76
References
Armstrong, D. M. 1980. Identity Through Time. In Peter van Inwagen (ed.), Time and Cause:
Essays Presented to Richard Taylor (pp. 67–78). Dordrecht: Riedel.
Armstrong, D. M. 1997. A World of States of Affairs. Philosophical Perspectives 7 (3):429–40.
Balcerak-Jackson, B. 2012. Metaphysics, Verbal Disputes and the Limits of Charity. Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 86 (2):412–34.
Balcerak Jackson, B. 2014. Verbal Disputes and Substantiveness. Erkenntnis 79 (1):31–54.
Barnes, E. 2014. Going Beyond the Fundamental: Feminism in Contemporary Metaphysics.
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 114 (3pt3): 335–51.
Belleri, D. 2017. A Pluralistic Way Out of Epistemic Deflationism about Ontological Disputes.
In Annalisa Coliva and Nikolaj Jang Lee Linding Pedersen (eds.), Epistemic Pluralism
(pp. 31744). London: Palgrave MacMillan.
Bennett, K. 2009. Composition, Colocation, and Metaontology. In David John Chalmers,
David Manley, and Ryan Wasserman (eds.), Metametaphysics: New Essays on the Foundations
of Ontology (pp. 3876). New York: Oxford University Press.
Brandom, R. 1994. Making It Explicit: Reasoning, Representing, and Discursive Commitment.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Burgess, A. 2015. An Inferential Account of Referential Success. In S. Gross, N. Tebben, and
M. Williams (eds.), Meaning Without Representation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Burgess, A., and Plunkett, D. 2013. Conceptual Ethics I and II. Philosophy Compass
8 (12):1091–110.
Cappelen, H. 2018. Fixing Language: Conceptual Engineering and the Limits of Revision.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carmichael, C. 2015. Toward a Commonsense Answer to the Special Composition Question.
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 93:475–90.
Chalmers, D. J. 2011. Verbal Disputes. Philosophical Review 120 (4):515–66.
Díaz-León, E. (Chapter 9, this volume). Descriptive versus Ameliorative Projects: The Role of
Normative Considerations. In Alexis Burgess, Herman Cappelen, and David Plunkett (eds.),
Conceptual Ethics and Conceptual Engineering. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dorr, C. (2005). What We Disagree About When We Disagree About Ontology. In Mark Eli
Kalderon (ed.), Fictionalism in Metaphysics (pp. 234–86). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Field, H. 1994. Deflationist Theories of Meaning and Content. Mind, New Series 103
(411):249–85.
Fine, K. 2006. In Defense of Three-Dimensionalism. Journal of Philosophy CIII (12):699–714.
Gibbard, A. 1975. Contingent Identity. Journal of Philosophical Logic 4:187–221.
Hale, B., and Wright, Crispin. 2001. Reason’s Proper Study: Essays Towards a Neo-Fregean
Philosophy of Mathematics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hale, B., and Crispin Wright 2009. The Metaontology of Abstraction. In David John Chalmers,
David Manley, and Ryan Wasserman (eds.), Metametaphysics: New Essays on the Foundations
of Ontology (pp. 178–212). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Haslanger, S. 1989. Endurance and Temporary Intrinsics. Analysis 49 (3):119–25.
Heller, M. 1990. The Ontology of Physical Objects: Four-Dimensional Hunks of Matter.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hirsch, E. 2005. Physical-Object Ontology, Verbal Disputes, and Common Sense. Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 70:67–98.
Hirsch, E. 2008a. Ontological Arguments: Interpretive Charity and Quantifier Variance. In
John Hawthorne, Theodore Sider, and Dean Zimmerman (eds.), Contemporary Debates in
Metaphysics (pp. 367–81). Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
 
  
  77
Hirsch, E. 2008b. Language, Ontology, and Structure. Noûs 42 (3):509–28.
Hirsch, E. 2009. Ontology and Alternative Languages. In David John Chalmers, David Manley,
and Ryan Wasserman (eds.), Metametaphysics: New Essays on the Foundations of Ontology
(pp. 23159). Oxford: Oxford University Press
Hirsch, E. 2011. Quantifier Variance and Realism: Essays in Metaontology. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Horden, J. 2014. Ontology in Plain English. The Philosophical Quarterly 64 (255):225–42.
Horwich, P. 1998. Truth. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Jenkins, C. 2014. Merely Verbal Disputes. Erkenntnis 79 (1):11–30.
Lewis, D. K. 1986. On the Plurality of Worlds. London: Blackwell Publishers.
Magidor, O. 2016. Endurantism Vs. Perdurantism A Debate Reconsidered. Noûs 50
(3):509–32.
Markosian, N. 2014. A Spatial Approach to Mereology. In Shieva Kleinschmidt (ed.), Mereology
and Location (pp. 69–90). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Merricks, T. 1994. Endurance and Indiscernibility. Journal of Philosophy 91 (4):165–84.
Merricks, T. 2001. Objects and Persons. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Miller, K. 2005. The Metaphysical Equivalence of Three and Four Dimensionalism. Erkenntnis
62: 91–117.
Plunkett, D. 2015. Which Concepts Should We Use Metalinguistic Negotiations and the
Methodology of Philosophy. Inquiry 58 (7–8):828–74.
Plunkett, D., and Sundell, Timothy. 2013. Disagreement and the Semantics of Normative and
Evaluative Terms. Philosophers’ Imprint 13 (23):1–37.
Quine, W. V. O. 1948. On What There Is. Review of Metaphysics 2 (5):21–36.
Quine, W. V. O. 1951. On Carnap’s Views on Ontology. Philosophical Studies II (5):65–72.
Quine, W. V. O. 1960. Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Rea, M. C. 1998. In Defense of Mereological Universalism. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 58 (2):347–60.
Rosen, G. 1994. Objectivity and Modern Idealism: What Is the Question In John O’Leary-
Hawthorne and Michael Michaelis (eds.), Philosophy in Mind (pp. 277319). London:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Rosen, G., and Dorr, C. 2002. Composition as Fiction. In Gale, R. (ed.), The Blackwell
Companion to Metaphysics (pp. 151–74). Oxford: Blackwell.
Sidelle, A. 2002. Is There a True Metaphysics of Material Objects Philosophical Issues 12
(1):118–45.
Sider, T. 1997. Four-Dimensionalism. Philosophical Review 106 (2):197–231.
Sider, T. 2001. Four Dimensionalism: An Ontology of Persistence and Time. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Sider, T. 2011. Writing the Book of the World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sundell, T. 2011. Disagreements about Taste. Philosophical Studies 155 (2):267–88.
Thomasson, A. L. 2007. Ordinary Objects. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Thomasson, A. L. 2009. Answerable and Unanswerable Questions. In David Chalmers, David
Manley, and Ryan Wasserman (eds.), Metametaphysics (pp. 444–71). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Thomasson, A. L. 2015. Ontology Made Easy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Thomasson, A. L. 2016. Metaphysical Disputes and Metalinguistic Negotiation. Analytic
Philosophy 57 (3):1–28.
Unger, P. 1979. There Are No Ordinary Things. Synthese 41 (2):117–54.
Van Cleve, J. 1986. Mereological Essentialism, Mereological Conjunctivism, and Identity
Through Time. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 11 (1):141–56.
 
  
  78
Van Inwagen, P. 1990. Four-Dimensional Objects. Noûs 24 (2):245–55.
Wallace, M. MS. Modal Parts and Ontological Disagreement.
Wheeler, S. 1979. On that which is Not. Synthese 41 (2):155–73.
Wiggins, D. 2001. Sameness and Substance Renewed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Yablo, S. 2002. Go Figure: A Path to Fictionalism. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 25 (1):72–102.

  79
Reactive Concepts
Engineering the Concept
David Braddon-Mitchell
1. Introduction
This is a volume about the enterprises known variously as conceptual engineering¹
and conceptual ethics.² Exactly what is the nature of the relationship between these
terms is still fluid; but a good way to rationalize it might be this. Conceptual
engineering is the business of changing existing concepts and devising new ones.
Conceptual ethics is the business of evaluating existing concepts and ways of talking,
along with newly engineered ones, and making normative judgments as to whether
they are fit for purpose. Jointly they promise reform through innovation and
selection of how we think and talk in the pursuit of various ends—whether moral
ends, practical ends, or alethic ends.
Thought and talk are the promised targets of these conceptual reforms. I’ll set aside
talk for now, though I’ll come back to it. But ‘thought’ suggests—as does the word
‘conceptual’—that at least in part concepts are a key part of the reformist’s ontology. She
will be engineering new ones, and recommending the adoption of some new ones, and
the revision or sidelining of others. But what about the concept ??????? itself? Could
there be ways of thinking about what concepts are that are different from standard
understandings, but which have benefits that the conceptual reformer might take to be
significant enough to merit recommending that we think and talk in terms of them?
This chapter recommends such a revision, or perhaps addition, to our stock of
ideas about concepts. Classical and neo-classical accounts of concepts are thought to
be connected in various ways to regular beliefs³—they enable us to have certain kinds
of beliefs with certain kinds of content. The key idea in this chapter will be that there
is a kind of mental concept which is connected to a mental state that is a little
different from the usual conception of belief. Beliefs—straightforwardly in the functionalist
tradition4 but also in many others5—are individuated by what one might call
¹ Floridi (2011); Cappelen (forthcoming). ² Burgess and Plunkett 2013a.
³ For a taxonomy of accounts, see chapter 1 of Margolis and Lawrence (1999).
4 Braddon-Mitchell and Jackson 2007.
5 Consider, for example, the covariational program that starts with Dretske (1981) or the teleonomic
one which has perhaps its best expression in Shea (2013).
 
 
 
  80
their ‘input’ conditions. At its crudest these are just what distally causes them, but
various traditions include what they co-vary with, what ideally causes them, and so
on. At its most general, we might describe them as word-head connections. The
connection to behaviour (and thus the head-world connection) is purely via their
interaction with desires: distinct states which interact with beliefs to produce
behaviour.
Let me give a motivating example which I will discuss later: an unspeakable word
and associated concept which, in the case of racist speech in my culture (I’m an
Anglo-Celtic Australian), represents an indigenous person. In order not to distract by
mentioning the word (mention sometimes has spillover effects from use) I’ll pretend
that word is “Arthur” and the corresponding concept A?????. What’s racist about
it? It’s not just linguistic. It’s that corresponding to that word there is a racist
concept—or at least a mental entity in the concept family. And that mental entity
does not merely represent skin colour or information about ancestry. Rather, it’s one
which when tokened itself directly causes negative affect of a range of types, which in
turn both directly and indirectly motivates discrimination and other behaviours;
none of this happens indirectly via discrete racist beliefs of the form ‘Arthurs are lazy’
and so forth. Recognizing that there are such mental entities in the concept family
gives us the power to challenge them. If there is such a concept it’s not one we should
possess (although this chapter is of course asking you to possess the concept of such a
concept—more on that distinction later as well). Perhaps, too, it will be explanatory:
certain kinds of implicit bias may be explained by the fact that such a concept is
possessed, even though no explicit negative beliefs are held, and the concept may be
given a linguistic label the same as the anodyne representational concept (perhaps the
tacitly prejudiced person possesses this special kind of concept A????? while using
the word ‘Aboriginal’.
This chapter will recommend, then, that we consider a kind of concept which bears
a relation like the one traditional accounts of concepts bear to beliefs, but instead
bears it to states individuated not only by their causal inputs, but also by their direct
causal outputs. I’ll call these states reactive representations, RRs for short. They are
partially representational states which are reactive inasmuch as they bypass interaction
with distinct desires to directly motivate behaviour. In a later section I’ll
discuss how this relates to well known objections to ‘besires’: states that combine
features of beliefs and of desires.
I will argue that there seems to be an important difference between two sorts of
representational mechanisms: ones that really do act like mere beliefs where the
representational state is discreet, and waits for a motivational state to come along and
interact with it, and cases where the act of recognition—the act of representing—has
itself immediate motivational force, as in the case of ‘thick’ moral terms,6 certain sorts
of phenomenal concepts and, I think, cases of bias and hate. When the motivating
force is immediate, the motivation itself becomes part of how we taxonomize the
6 It might seem that by explaining thick moral terms and slurs in terms of concepts I’m coming down
firmly on the side of a debate about whether these are pragmatic or semantic phenomena (see Väyrynen
2013) for a defence of the pragmatic account). Certainly that’s one way to taxonomize the view I will
defend. But another would be to somewhat problematize the pragmatic/semantic distinction

  
  81
world: being apt for motivating in that way is part of what makes us see something
as falling under the concept. I’ll call a concept that is connected to an RR in the way
an ordinary concept is connected to an ordinary belief a Reactive Concept, or
R-concept. Whether there are such things, as I understand them, is an empirical
matter which my research team is investigating. Here I argue only that the hypothesis
that there are does a lot of explanatory work, and most importantly for current
purposes, makes sense of the focus on the reform of concepts on normative grounds
that has been called conceptual ethics (Burgess and Plunkett 2013a,b).
2. The R-concept Hypothesis
In this section I will first elaborate a little more on the hypothesis that there are
R-concepts and then consider how they compare to ordinary concepts, ordinary
beliefs, and desires. I then go on to consider whether the idea can be easily subsumed
by global belief-desire psychology.
2.1. Concepts, R-concepts, Beliefs, and Desires
Exactly what the relationship is between beliefs and desires and representational
content is complicated. But for our purposes here let it be assumed that concepts are
part of what makes it possible to possess certain beliefs or desires, or what makes it
possible to token a representation with a certain propositional content.7 Insofar as
you possess the concept ‘triangle’ you can token states that represent triangles. So
perhaps to possess a concept is to possess a kind of ability. There are complications
that don’t matter for now: there is a tradition according to which a concept is what
allows one to explicitly and consciously represent a certain state, others on which
they are required to represent something de dicto rather than merely de re (on such
views mental states might have non-conceptual content8). But the simple formulation
will do for our purposes.
Concepts traditionally, then, fall firmly on the representational side of the mental
family. If I possess the concept ‘possum’ then that is part of what it takes to be able to
form at least de dicto beliefs about possums?. Rational people require, in addition,
evidence of various sorts to form beliefs. In the case of beliefs, possession of the
concept together with evidential or causal connections makes, in normal subjects,
possession of the belief in some cases almost automatic. If I have the concept then at very least I will form the belief that it seems that there is a possum
here. If I take myself to be in a position to trust my perception, then I’ll form the
belief that there is a possum nearby.
The idea here is firmly attached to standard belief-desire psychology. Beliefs are
states which when formed have no power to motivate by themselves. Rather they sit
in the head, waiting to be paired up with a state which will interlock with them. Their
7 This is close to the rough characterization in Burgess and Plunkett (2013a) except that it’s a necessary
condition, rather than a sufficient one for thought formation.
8 See Bermúdez (2007) and Roskies (2008) for some up to date discussion of this idea.
? And desires, but the point which follows about automatic production may not apply in this case.
 
 
  82
semantic values, while they depend on the overall cause roles they play, perhaps
together with desires, are invisible to the desire mechanism.¹° Once the belief that, for
example, a possum is present is formed, a mental entity hangs around with a local
syntactic shape that can be recognized by desire-like objects. If the desire to be near a
possum encounters a belief that a possum is near, then (ceteris paribus) the agent
doesn’t move. If it is encountered by a desire for possum flesh, quite other behaviour
is caused.
It is not part of the individuation condition of a belief that it causes any particular
behaviour; the behaviour depends entirely on the agent’s desire profile. And a
standard concept is, inter alia, something that is required to form beliefs.
But notice that it’s a contingent fact that the token physical state which is sitting
around waiting for desires doesn’t itself directly cause behaviour. In principle there
could be such states; states formed by certain input conditions, which indeed might
sit around and wait for desires, but in the meantime directly shortcut the belief-desire
system to produce behaviours. There could be a state, co-varying and generally
having whatever your favourite foundational semantics says makes it about possums,
which directly motivates running away from possums. Let’s call this state ‘UGHPOSSUM’.
The state itself, when formed, has the power to initiate movement away
from the possum. Insofar as it has belief like features, it can also combine with other
desires about possums (if you independently desire to sing a silly song about possums
whenever near one, so you will sing as you leave). But it doesn’t need any such extra
desire to do certain things. This token state realizes¹¹ a belief that there is a possum
nearby. But it does not *only* realize a belief that there is a possum nearby: it has
extra powers that not every belief that there is a possum nearby would have. A kind to
which this token state belongs is not individuated by the purely representational
semantics, it’s individuated as well by its output powers: it’s powers to directly
produce behaviour. Such a state is what I’m calling a reactive representation. An
immediate concern that you might have is that this sounds an awful lot like a besire,
and there are well known objections to the very possibility or coherence of such
states. But nothing I say here depends on showing those objections don’t work, as in
section 4.2 I argue that in fact RRs are not besires.
The extension of the idea of a concept I’mrecommending here bears the same kind
of relationship to RRs as the traditional idea of a concept does to beliefs. The RR
‘UGHPOSSUM’ is a state which is belief like inasmuch as it responds to inputs; is
caused by possums; and tracks perceptual evidence of possums. But rather than
waiting for desires to come along and interact with it, it directly induces aversion of
the detected object. The R-concept is a kind of ability. It’s the ability to
form these states. Possession of the R-concept is required to have the
ability to form the RR ‘UGHPOSSUM’. And just as in the case of regular concepts,
where there were conditions in which possession of the concept makes forming
beliefs automatic, there will be conditions in which possessing a certain R-concept
will make tokening the relevant RR automatic. If someone who possesses a certain
¹° A point vigorously stressed in Fodor (1987) and countless subsequent publications.
¹¹ The reader wondering why I have said ‘realizes’ rather than ‘is’ will have her questions answered in
section 4.2.
  
  83
R-concept sees presentations as of the representational features encoded in the
R-concept then they will token the RR UGHPOSSUM, and this will
in turn produce the downstream causal effect of fleeing the marsupial infested
neighbourhood.
2.2. Comparison with Standard Accounts of Concepts
So in using R-concepts to taxonomize the mind we will draw distinctions differently.
Two concepts that have the same input conditions will count as the same ordinary
intensional concept. But if two states which have the same input conditions, but one
gives the capacity to form regular beliefs, and the other gives the capacity to produce
RRs which bypass the standard desire mechanisms to motivate behaviour, they count
as different along the R-concept dimension. Is there any motivation to use the term
‘concept’ for R-concepts at all, rather than engineering an entirely different term for
this sort of mental entity?
There are plenty of prima facie reasons for using the word ‘concept’ here: clarity,
ease of explanation, and so on. But another is that we already need to vary the
standard intensional individuation of concepts to explain mental phenomena which
are amongst those whose explanation it is the job of a theory of concepts to provide.
Ordinary concepts are often thought to be fully individuated by their input
conditions—or at least what it takes to fall under them is. But something other
than the ‘ordinary’ idea of individuation of concepts by the features of the things
which makes them fall under that concept may already be needed to account for
merely hyperintensionally distinct concepts.¹² Some such hyperintensional distinctions
might, for example, be marked by method of detection, rather than features
required for the thing to fall under the concept. It takes the same features in the world
for something to count as falling under and, but one can
imagine someone disposed to try to identify these figures by counting angles insofar
as she is deploying the concept, and angles insofar as she is deploying.
So are and the same concept or are they different concepts?
Surely there is no need to make that call: they are intensionally the same but
hyperintensionally distinct. If one wanted terminology, one could say they are
same concept but different H-concept (friends of the hyperintensional often like to
think that concepts are individuated hyperintensionally, and they use another world
for intensional concepts, but that’s a fight about words).
This seems to be the right thing to say in this case, and no-one I know of has
suggested that insofar as concepts are hyperintensionally distinct they are not
conceptually distinct in some sense (if anything, as above, the other move is more
often heard—that concepts are hyperintensional through and through, and that
intensional distinctions are coarser grained than the usual conceptual ones). And if
it is the right thing to say in this case, then it seems to apply to the case of R-concepts
as well. For here also we have intensionally (and maybe hyperintensionally) distinct
¹² For a sketch of an account of this that does not invoke metaphysically robust impossibilities, see
Braddon-Mitchell (2009).
 
  84
states, which because they function causally in slightly different ways, get to count as
different in a different dimension from the intensional or hyperintensional.
2.3. R-concepts versus Belief Desire Psychology with Irrationality
or a Divided Mind
So if the distinction between R-concepts and standard concepts is a good one, the
easy job of saying that they deserve to be thought of as a kind of concept is done. But
our comparison with standard accounts of the relationship between beliefs and
concepts is not yet done. For there is a danger that R-concepts and RRs might be
redundant given the way belief-desire psychology is often understood.
So far I have introduced the idea of RRs in terms of the different behaviour of
token concepts. The thought is that there are tokens of the required types in the head,
and there is a difference in behaviour between RRs and standard beliefs. Standard
beliefs stand as if at a dance, looking for a desire partner with whom to generate
behaviours. RRs do the work themselves, as it were, without a partner.
But on a global conception of belief-desire psychology this doesn’t make sense. On
this conception, thinkers don’t have individual beliefs and desires. Rather they have
global input output profiles, complete belief-desire states (Braddon-Mitchell and
Jackson 2003: chapter 3). Individual beliefs (or desires) only make sense as abstractions
that describe the minimal differences between global states.
On this conception having the R-concept is indistinguishable from
having an overall belief-desire profile which includes the belief that there are possums
around, and a desire to vacate the possum rich environment. For you are globally set
up such that when you encounter possums you flee them.
For many purposes that’s the right conception of belief and desire, in my view. But
I’m less sure than I once was that it’s always the most useful conception. In particular,
it doesn’t play well with typical actual behavioural profiles in that it can’t make sense
of irrationality.
Suppose, for example, that you are disposed to apparently randomly flee possums
or not. It turns out that what is going on is that you approve of possums; you have
a standing desire to observe them. But nonetheless you possess the
R-concept, so your categorization process produces an immediate impulse to flee.
At times when you are reflective, you overcome this because of your desire to observe
and be in the company of possums. At other times you just react unreflectively and
flee the neighbourhood. Or consider someone who sincerely claims that certain
behaviours are likely to cause eternal torture, who sincerely believes that infinite
torture massively outweighs fleeting pleasure, yet performs behaviours which would,
if this were true, bring about the infinite pain and only modest pleasure—and does all
this with only modest regret. The global story here has unilluminating fixes:¹³ you
have context dependent desires (you desire-when-reflective to be with possums, you
desire-when-unreflective to avoid them) or the divided mind hypothesis (Lewis 1982;
Stalnaker 1984; Davidson 2004; Egan 2008). It’s unsurprising that these are a little
unilluminating about the exact behaviour of mental states in less that perfectly
¹³ For a nice account of the ways in which these are unilluminating, see Norby (2014). 
  85
rational beings like us: for all of these fixes are not designed to taxonomize the mind
in terms of token states, but rather to preserve global accounts of the way the mind is,
removing contradiction either by creating two separate consistent accounts (the
fragmentation story), or one in which our desires and perhaps beliefs are so massively
context dependent they don’t play the kinds of roles in our ordinary discourse that
they were intended to (e.g., a desire-when-reflective as against a desire-when-unreflective,
or a belief-when-talking-about-the-act as against a belief-when-acting).
When we aren’t talking about an abstract global theory of what it is to be a rational
being (for which global belief-desire theory seems eminently suited) but rather
interested in token explanations, the hypothesis that sometimes a single token state
both motivates and represents, and at other times the work is divided between
distinct token states, is both illuminating and empirically tractable. It seems to
explain a lot if true, and it shouldn’t be beyond our powers to find out if it is true.
3. General Explanatory Benefits of R-concepts
Including Ones for Conceptual Ethics
In this section I argue that, if the R-concept hypothesis is correct, it would not only
provide direct benefits in explaining the importance of conceptual ethics but would
also provide general explanatory benefits.
3.1. Three Unified Benefits: Hate Speech, Crypto-evaluative Terms,
Phenomenal Concepts
Here’s another benefit of the idea of the R-concept. It provides a unity of explanation
over a range of three apparently very different areas. I’ll briefly survey the advantages
that this story might have in each of the areas, suggesting that the unity over the areas
it brings is a theoretical advantage, and that in each case understanding that there are
R-concepts involved makes better sense of the projects of conceptual engineering and
conceptual ethics in these domains.

I’ve already given the example of hate speech: here the idea is that to hate speech
there might correspond hate R-concepts; which give you token states which both
represent the external world a certain way, and cause you to react in a certain way.
That the reaction is so immediate also gives the impression that being apt for the
reaction is part of what it takes to fall under the R-concept. So if we wanted a
theory of content for R-concepts, then this would likely come with the territory. The
R-concept causes you to token states which represent indigenous Australians,
to respond in a certain way and also to form the view of them being represented as
rightly producing that response. You do not truly fall under that concept, the racist is
likely to think, unless you are deserving of the response. This makes richer sense of
the recommendation that a practitioner of conceptual ethics might be doing when
she recommends against using the word “Arthur”. If it was just an issue of the word
then the focus seems to be on two possible worries. One is not using the word because
it gives offence. This is a weak justification for two reasons. One is that there is a
 
  86
liberal conception of offence as a very weak kind of harm, which hardly justifies
restriction of this kind of speech unless we extend the harm into a kind of verbal
violence. Perhaps a reasonable move, but not an uncontroversial one. The other is
that it gives evidence of racist attitudes on the part of the speaker. But this would
be superficial evidence: if the underlying concept is just the same as the representational
concept “Aboriginal” the only racism is being careless with possible
offence. But the intuition many have is that it’s not an unqualified benefit to
have racists hide their colours by careful choice of words. So there’s something
more going on than just choice of words. On the R-concept story, though, it is
indeed evidence: but one which shows that the user of the word may possess a
certain R-concept, something which other things being equal disposes them to
prejudicial action. And making a recommendation against such a concept, even to
someone in the grip of it, might sometimes help. Seeing how hard it is not to talk
in those terms, she can become aware of it and, if in respect of her considered
desires they are reasonable, she may try to remove the concept from her mental
repertoire. I discuss in section 3.3 the prospects for finding a connection between
use of words and R-concepts.
Perhaps here a few words are appropriate to discuss the extent to which
accepting my view requires you to take sides on existing views about pejorative
language. You might think that my view, tied as it is to R-concepts, falls firmly on
the side of analyses which place the emphasis on the content of the expressions
(see, e.g., Hom 2008). But that of course depends on what you mean by ‘content’.
I talk of the ‘content’ of R-concepts, and call R-concepts a kind of concept because
I think that there are similarities in the way these notions do explanatory work to
purely descriptive concepts and contents. But of course it’s an extension of both
ideas. And as such it’s ultimately terminological (though not therefore unimportant)
whether the extensions deserve the original terms. Another way of using the
ideas I propose would be to accept that the mental entities I call “R-concepts”
exist, and think of them as the underlying mechanisms that explain much of the
pragmatics of thought and talk. The view is inconsistent, though, with any account
according to which there is nothing mental that distinguishes what’s going on in
these cases from cases where there is no pejorative or hateful language. A very flatfooted
version of Anderson and Lepore’s view in their (2013) according to which
the fact that the words are taboo is the only explanatory factor would be inconsistent
with it, and the explanation would be entirely outside the head of the user.
Finally, much of the literature concentrates on things that have speech does. There
is a tendency in philosophy, as elsewhere, to promote single factor explanations,
so that the promoter—should she win—gets to have a monopoly on being right.
To the extent that linguistic behaviour has many important effects, one might
think that this should flourish. So, for example, Camp’s view (2013) that pejorative
language serves to signal alignment with a certain perspective is something, which
if just baldly stated like that is likely often true, and certainly consistent with what
I say. Even stronger versions of it—such as the view that the distal explanation of
its prevalence is to do with such signalling—are more empirically risky, but also
consistent. What isn’t consistent would be the view that none of the proximal
psychology is as I describe.
 
  87
At first blush, it might seem as though phenomenal concepts have very little to do
with the topics we have been discussing. But I think that R-concepts explain
important features of them as well. Consider a discussion which went on over
many years between me and my friend the sadly late philosopher Jonathan
McKeown-Green. Jonathan was blind from birth, and as a philosopher interested
in perception, he was a natural person to talk to about colour concepts. At some level
he thought he couldn’t possibly have the same concept that I had. But intensionally
he possessed a concept (let’s call it Red-J) that was identical to mine: let’s say
it tracked a certain reflectance profile. And yet, he and I thought, it wasn’t the same
concept.
When there is similarity at the intensional level, but difference of concept, you
might diagnose hyperintensionality. But that’s not what’s going on here. If one of our
concepts was hyperintensional, it would categorize in a more fine grained way. But
there’s nothing more fine grained here in either of our concepts.
Perhaps it’s response dependence that’s at issue (Pettit 1991). But moving to a
typical response dependent conception doesn’t help either. If is to be characterized
as “apt in normal conditions to produce response R in species-typical individuals”
then again we have an ordinary intensional concept, and something that
Jonathan and I could agree on, while not dispelling the sense that we don’t possess
the same concept—that somehow, while we agree on this, he didn’t understand what
sighted people mean by a term like ‘red’.
But notice that there is an R-concept and RR in the neighbourhood. Recall that an
RR is something which is responsive to information about the world, but part of its
individuation is via not just those inputs, but its outputs—the things it causes. So far
the outputs we have considered are ones of reactive attitudes and behaviours. But
reactive phenomenologies are just yet more causes.¹4 To possess the R-concept is
to possess a capacity (and perhaps a disposition) to token the RR ‘red’. The RR ‘red’ is
tokened when the agent receives certain information about the world¹5 but also has
the effect of producing the phenomenology.¹6
This, then, is something Jonathan and I do not share. He does not possess the
R-concept as he does not possess the ability to token the RR ‘red’, even though
he does share the intensional concept. The R-concept has as a feature an
effect on what it takes to be in this sense—that is, had produced this effect in me.
So while there is a sense (derived from the intensional concept) in which we can
¹4 By phenomenologies here I don’t mean anything substantive. If you are a dualist who believes in rich
qualia, let them be the causal product of tokening certain RRs. If you are at the other extreme, and think it’s
all about dispositions to make verbal claims about experience, let those dispositions be possessed by the
RR. And for every positions in between the same can be said.
¹5 If this were a chapter about phenomenal concepts, then some discussion of whether the input
channels are relevant here would be appropriate—maybe it makes a difference if it is tokened by the
perceptual system.
¹6 There are interesting issues here about how integrated an RR has to be. Perhaps empirically we may
find the cause of phenomenal component in the perceptual system, and the cognitive component
elsewhere. And yet somehow there is a “binding” of the two. The bound pair might be thought to be a
cause of the phenomenology, but possibly not the cognitive component alone.
 
  88
both judge that some flower is red (me by looking, he by consulting a colour meter)
there is another in which he cannot judge that it’s red in the same way as me. 
Finally a certain kind of puzzle in giving an account of certain concepts is explicable if
there are R-concepts in the vicinity. These are concepts I call ‘crypto-evaluative’.
They might include and many others. I call them
crypto-evaluative because on the surface they seem amenable to analysis in terms of
what features of the world are required for them. We might, for example, give a story
about what decision making processes count as democratic. But they are all vulnerable
to normative objections that expose the hidden evaluate features. Suppose an
agent considers an excellent account of what democratic decision making amounts to
(and thinks herself a democrat) but judges that that’s not a good way to organize
society. Likely she will make the ‘true democracy’ move: she will be less inclined to
judge that that procedure really is democratic.
Consider the debate about the concept of happiness. Various descriptive accounts
of happiness—ones which feature objective lists, or which feature psychological
states—have been criticized on the grounds that these things could in principle
turn out to be undesirable. (Nozick 1989; Nussbaum 2008). The obvious alternative
is explicitly normative accounts: happiness is the greatest prudential good, or happiness
is flourishing of some kind. These in turn are criticized as leaving out a
substantial account of what happiness is (Haybron 2008; Feldman 2010). (Maybe
the concept is one which is committed to mental ease, or some other psychological
state, as part of what it takes to be happy—no-one is happy, such a response goes,
however much she has the objective list if she is miserable.)
If there is an R-concept to be had (perhaps in addition to a standard
one) then what that R-concept amounts to is the ability to form the RR ‘happiness’.
And, perhaps, the RR ‘happiness’ is tokened when there is a state which is caused by
(or otherwise represents) some list of features—perhaps in this case internal psychological
ones, perhaps also elements of an objective list—but which also causes
motivation towards these features. So no-one would judge that she is happy (insofar
as the R-concept is playing a role in the judgement) unless her representation of these
states motivated her towards it. Thus we get an explanation of how someone can both
be prone to think that there is substantial empirical content to the concept of
happiness, and yet be drawn to the idea that some normative features are essential
to it. Crytpo-evaluative concepts are just R-concepts.
I’ll add one very brief speculation. A lot has been written about implicit bias; bias
where agents seem to have both explicit beliefs and explicit desires which don’t
appear to have any bias towards a group of people. And yet, the agent behaves in a
biased way: perhaps being more inclined to vote against someone from a minority
group in a job selection, for example. One hypothesis worth testing would be that
R-concepts are involved here. If the biased motivation is part of the R-concept—a
direct causal product of the representation—and not a result of stand alone desires
metaphorically looking for beliefs to pair with, then it’s more likely that such a
 
  89
pattern might be something the agent herself could miss when interrogating her
discreet beliefs and desires. There may be no stand alone desire not to see members
of that group employed, and no stand alone belief that they shouldn’t be, but the
R-concept makes it likely that, confronted by members of a group, an RR will be
formed which directly causes the biased behaviour.
3.2. Conceptual Difference Where There Is No Disagreement About Fact
So far I have done some setup about the idea of the R-concept, and discussed some of
benefits of having the notion to hand. In this section I’ll talk about another case that
I think makes R-concepts worth exploring for conceptual engineers.
Sometimes there seem to be disagreements which matter a lot, but which don’t
seem to depend on any disagreement of fact.
Consider the concept of ‘survival’¹7 It’s very contentious what exactly survival
amounts to. I’m tempted myself to think that it’s a difficult notion, which admits of
degree (Braddon-Mitchell and Miller MS). But for current purposes we need only
consider two alternatives; a physical continuity theory and a psychological continuity
theory. The simple physical continuity theory is just one that says you survive over
some interval iff you are related to the entity at the end of the interval by the ancestral
of the physical similarly relation. That relation in turn holds when there is object
causally connected to you which overlaps with your current self physically to a very
high degree. The psychological continuity theory is much the same, substituting
psychological similarity for physical similarity. It’s usually assumed that our account
of psychological similarity is one which allows psychological similarity across discontinuous
physical change—as with material destruction followed by reconstruction,
or downloading.
It’s notorious that people disagree vigorously about the plausibility of these two
theories, which in part is what makes them good things to discuss in introductory
courses.
I’ve tracked the opinions of undergraduate students on these topics for a number
of years, and found that roughly speaking 40% of classes of 400 students or so are
attracted to psychological continuity theories, and 45% or so are attracted to physical
continuity theories, at least insofar as they take this difference to explain their
different reaction to teletransporter cases.
The well known teletransporter cases are ones where there is bodily destruction
but recording of the psychological information, followed by bodily recreation at a
distant location, down to the relevant degree of detail required for the psychological
information to be preserved.
Those who are attracted to the psychological continuity theory say that teletransporters,
should they come to exist, will provide painless easy travel, and will be
happy to use them if the price is right. Physical continuity theorists are genuinely
baffled by this, and tend to scream at their fellow students of the other persuasion
“you don’t get it: you are being paid money to be killed”.
¹7 The locus classicus is of course Parfit (1984).
 
  90
Now the question that I’m hoping R-concepts can help with is this: what is the
disagreement about?
This question arises because it is possible to divide up the sample of students in
ways that factor out obvious sources of disagreement.
Here are some obvious sources:
(1) Perhaps some students believe in souls, and really hold a soul continuity
theory. But they think that souls are directly connected to bodies, at least
insofar as boldly destruction severs the soul from the earth.
(2) Perhaps some students are dualists, and they think that no matter what I try to
tell them about how a recreated brain will support consciousness, they don’t
accept this, and thus think they’ll no longer exist after teletransportation,
because there’ll be no experience.
(3) Perhaps students think that there are substantive metaphysical facts about
what survival is grounded in. Survival is worth having, they think, and it is a
natural feature of the world (other things people might call survival are mere
gerrymandered things of no interest) and the job of metaphysics is to find
what grounds survival: so these two possible candidates, the two continuity
theories, are alternative accounts of what the grounds of survival are. The
disagreement is about the metaphysical fact about the nature of the grounds of
survival.
So in order to eliminate these possibilities as sources of disagreement, I excluded
from my sample people who believe in souls, people who are dualists, and people who
believe in grounding. Each of these groups have an answer to what the disagreement
of fact might still obtain between people who agree on the fundamental physical
facts. The people who believe in souls think that while we might agree about the
physical body and its constituents, there is something else—the soul—which might
or might not be present, and we could be tacitly disagreeing about that (your body
will survive, and your brain, but not your soul). Dualists, very similarly, might take
the view that the dualistic component of the mental may survive some (identity
preserving) physical changes, but not others. And finally, these undergraduates were
taught about metaphysical grounding: the version in which grounded entities are
ontologically distinct yet grounded in underlying physical nature. On many such
views it’s a substantial metaphysical fact which fundamental states ground the nonfundamental,
and if persons are non-fundamental, there can be a substantial disagreement
as to which physical states ground them.
On eliminating these people whose views take them to think there is a substantial
disagreement there was only a slight change. Of the remaining group (luckily for
current purposes my university is in a culture with few soul believers amongst
undergraduates) the split is now about even. And now the puzzle is more serious.
All of them agree, for the sake of the example, on all the base metaphysical facts. They
agree about the nature of physical continuity. They agree about the nature of
psychological continuity. They agree about background physics and science more
generally insofar as it is relevant. They agree that there are no substantial grounding
relations which connect more abstract things like ‘grounding’ with the basic facts in
the universe. So what is left?
 
  91
The remaining obvious possibility is something like merely verbal or lexical
disagreement. They disagree about what ‘survival’ means. But that seems too thin a
thing to justify the reactions. The physical continuity theorists still hold that it’s mad
and bad to teletransport, because it doesn’t preserve survival. If it were a mere lexical
disagreement, then you’d expect that it could be solved by dictionary makers. And yet
no physical continuity theorist thinks she would be dissuaded by the discovery
that the OED says that the psychological continuity theory is the right definition
of the English word ‘survival’. Indeed, not all physical continuity theorists think that
their own theory does give the right account of the English word, or that it matters
that it does.
Parallel with a lexical story is what one might call a “mere” conceptual story. The
disagreement is about which concept to possess. But the problem with this is that
both parties already possess both concepts. Neither party thinks that one shouldn’t
possess the other concept. Indeed the physical continuity theorist couldn’t think
about what she is right about were it not for the fact that she possessed the concept
‘the thing that is preserved in psychological continuity, and that PC theorists call
“survival”’.
So what is the disagreement about, if it’s not fundamental metaphysics, grounding,
semantics, or concepts?
Well of course the striking difference is a difference that looks like it’s not one of
belief, but of motivation. The psychological continuity theorist is very much motivated
to preserve psychological continuity at almost any cost. The physical continuity
theorist is similarly motivated with respect to physical continuity.
So what’s going on here might be the possession of different R-concepts.
The teletransporters (those who believe they survive teletransportation) have an
R-concept which takes facts about psychological similarity as input, and directly
motivates behaviour seeking psychological similarity at all costs. The others have an
R-concept which takes facts about physical similarity as input, and similarly motivates
behaviour seeking physical similarity at all costs. The first category is motivated
to provide benefits to their psychological successors; the second will only be so
motivated if they are physical continuers.
How does the R-concepts strategy help? If it were merely a matter of each side
using different ordinary concepts, it would be still mysterious. For as I will explain in
section 4.1, successful explication of an ordinary concept to an agent entails it’s
possession by that agent, so both sides would possess both concepts. But as we will
see, R-concepts are different: you can explain the R-concept successfully to
someone without that person thereby possessing it (even if she possesses a kind of
meta-concept, as we will see). So it’s quite possible for the groups to possess different
R-concepts, for this to explain the difference, and for that fact not to change even
when we explain the idea of the R-concepts to both sides.
3.3. R-concepts and Words: How to Engineer R-concepts
A principal part of the justification for a theory of R-concepts is not just that it’s a
better way to taxonomize parts of our cognitive economy, but that it helps in the task
of conceptual revision under the guidance of conceptual ethics.

  92
The thought so far is that it gives us as conceptual ethicists a story of why certain
R-concepts are bad ones, and as engineers, a motivation to engineer new ones and try
to persuade people to adopt them.
But short of as yet practically impossible, and likely highly immoral, direct neural
intervention with our conceptual structures, the principal handle we have on our
conceptual life—at least our more complicated concepts—is via words. So it may pay
to consider the relationship between concepts and words, and R-concepts and words.
The use of words amongst those who understand them tends to token the concept
required for their understanding. If I say to you “be alert for triangles” you’ll be more
likely to look at your environment in a way which is alert to their presence, and thus
form beliefs that there are (or aren’t) triangles in the area.
The interesting question for our current concerns is how the word-concept pairing
works in the case of R-concepts. I suggested earlier that R-concepts may play an
explanatory role in the case of thick moral concepts. The question remains whether
the word-concept pairing is sufficiently robust that influencing verbal behaviour
can be part of an intervention strategy to minimize the harmful effects of harmful
R-concepts.
If it were, then we should expect something like this. The word “Arthur” is
associated with the R-concept The phrase “Indigenous person” is associated
with the R-concept. If you ask someone (who is neither a
committed racist nor alert to conceptual and linguistic contributions to discrimination
and oppression) to “look out for Arthurs” then, on sighting an indigenous
person, you might expect her to be more likely to form an RR with the content which in turn produces automatic fear responses and general negative
affect. If on the other hand she is primed differently, and asked to look out for
indigenous people, then on sighting such a person, you might expect her to be more
likely to token a representation only of the regular concept, and
thus have more neutral responses.
Of course all of this is tricky, since word-concept pairings are not entirely robust.
Perhaps part of what it is to be a committed racist, aside from explicitly held racist
beliefs, is to have the racist concept so firmly entrenched that all words for
indigenous people will token representations with the content, either
directly or via a very short chain of inference.
This, of course, is a second empirical matter concerning R-concepts which needs
investigating: not only the crucial one of whether we actually possess them, but also
the way in which the tokening of RRs under their influence is, or is not, mediated by
related words.
This is perhaps a good point to add one further speculation. A lot has been written
about implicit bias; bias where agents seem to have both explicit beliefs and explicit
desires which don’t appear to have any bias towards a group of people. And yet, the
agent behaves in a biased way: perhaps being more inclined to vote against someone
from a minority group in a job selection, for example. One hypothesis worth testing
would be that R-concepts are involved here. If the biased motivation is part of the
R-concept—a direct causal product of the representation—and not a result of stand
alone desires metaphorically looking for beliefs to pair with, then it’s more likely that
 
  93
such a pattern might be something the agent herself could miss when interrogating
her discreet beliefs and desires. There may be no stand alone desire not to see
members of that group employed, and no stand alone belief that they shouldn’t be,
but the R-concept makes it likely that, confronted by members of a group, an RR will
be formed which directly causes the biased behaviour.
4. Two Objections to the Theory of R-concepts
4.1. Failing to Possess the Concept and Failing to Understand the Concept
Here is a prima facie puzzle. With regular, purely representational concepts, understanding
a concept is roughly equivalent to possessing a concept. Once I understand
that the concept of is the concept of a plane figure with three sides, it
follows that I automatically possess the concept. Understanding what that concept is
gives me that concept. So by understanding what the concept is, I will end
up with any of the powers that are associated with the concept: the ability to form
thoughts about triangles, for example. By understanding the concept
I come to possess the concept, and form the ability to form thoughts about them. But
by understanding the R-concept we do not, we hope, thereby possess it, and
do not have the ability to form the relevant RR. This fact might make one think that
an R-concept is not really behaving like a concept.
It is helpful here to distinguish between a concept, and a meta-concept: the
concept of that concept. In the case of ordinary concepts they are distinct, but for
most purposes that distinctness doesn’t matter. The meta-concept of triangle is, for
example, the concept of some kind of mental entity or power that enables one to form
thoughts about three sided plane figures. That’s not the same as the first order
concept. But acquiring the meta-concept is sufficient for acquiring the
concept, so it rarely matters. Perhaps it matters in animal cognition or developmental
psychology, where plausibly some animals, and humans at some stages of development,
can possess concepts but not meta-concepts.
But the distinction matters here in realm of R-concepts. A possible complaint
about the idea of an R-concept is that the idea that we might be able to resist such
concepts is absurd—conceptual engineering will never be able to bring it about that
we do not have these concepts, especially not if we go about explaining them. For
typically, to explain a concept successfully is to bring it about that the person to
whom you have explained it possesses the concept. If I do a really good job of
explaining an alien concept to someone, perhaps the concept associated with the
Danish word “Hygge”—a concept of cosiness and domestic wintry comfort which is
at the time of writing fashionably held to be a key contributor to wellbeing—then
I will have succeeded insofar as she now possesses the concept. So if I somehow
explain the R-concept or the R-concept perhaps associated with the word
for which “The N word” is a euphemism—then it might seem that I will bring about
its possession. Then, as an objection, this can cut one of two ways. Either this is true,
and so there’s no benefit to talking about R-concepts, or else it’s an objection to the
possibility of there being any such thing as an R-concept.
 
  94
The latter horn of the dilemma goes this way:
(1) (Premise) if R-concepts are concepts then explanation will result in
possession.
(2) (Premise) Possession of R-concepts has motivational force and casual power.
(3) (Premise) Mere explanation cannot bring about by itself motivational force.
(4) (from (2) and (3)) Explanation will not bring about possession of R-concepts.
(5) (Conclusion—from (4) and (1)) R-concepts are not concepts.
The conclusion comes from applying modus pollens to the conditional in the first
premise. But of course this is not a compulsory move. Instead we should consider
how generally true the first premise is.
We saw that the first premise is indeed true of purely representational concepts.
But it is not true of R-concepts. But this is because the relationship between first
order concepts and meta-concepts is different in the case of R-concepts.
Mere explanation about the nature of an R-concept will create a meta-concept. But
it will be a purely representational meta-concept. Not an R-concept. And purely
representation meta-concepts do not have the automatic power to create the first
order R-concepts they represent, in the way that they do have the power to create first
order representational concepts.
Consider our racist example again. Giving lots of information about the R-concept will tell someone that there is a mental state which responds to evidence of
Aboriginality, which is able to interact with standing beliefs and desires, but that
without any such interaction motivates fear, distrust, and dislike. This information
creates in a comprehending recipient, a concept, for sure. It creates a concept (a
representational concept) of the R-concept. So it’s a representational metaconcept.
But having the concept of such a concept does not allow you to form
thoughts of the kind “there’s an Arthur”. Because thoughts of that kind require
you to have an RR, usually brought about by having the R-concept. And
indeed nothing purely informational will bring that about. Of course there are meta
R-concepts too: these might be concepts of R-concepts which come with built in
motivational force for the acquisition of the first order R-concept. Perhaps these
sorts of meta R-concepts may have some power to bring about possession of the
R-concept, but these meta R-concepts cannot be acquired by purely informational
means either.
So premise (1) should be rejected. It’s not true of all concepts that explanation of
them results in possession of them. Of course this does show that there is a difference
between purely representational concepts of which this may be true, and R-concepts
for which it is false. But that’s unsurprising. R-concepts are different from regular
concepts, and this difference exactly tracks the key, motivational, difference.
4.2. Reactive Representations and Besires
There is a substantial body of literature which denies the possibility of so-called
besires: states which are both beliefs and desires (e.g., Lewis 1988, 1996; Price 1989;
Smith 1994; Zangwell 2008). R-concepts are defined in terms of reactive representations:
and RRs at first blush look like they play both the belief role and the desire role.
 
 
  95
This would make them a kind of besire. There can be no R-concepts without RRs, so
if there are no besires, there are no R-concepts.
Let’s lay this out:
(1) (Premise) R-concepts are defined in terms of RRs.
(2) (From 1) If there are no RRs there are no R-concepts.
(3) (Premise) RRs are a kind of besire.
(4) (Premise from the Besires literature) Besires are impossible.
(5) (3 and 4) There are no RRs.
(6) (CONCLUSION from 5 and 2) There are no R-concepts.
It is far from uncontroversial that premise (4) is true. The besires literature is
loaded with arguments for and against the possibility of besires. But I’m going to
accept the premise: partly because I believe it to be true, and partly it puts my
suggestion in a dialectically better position if it’s compatible with the impossibility
of besires.
The strategy I’ll adopt is perhaps surprising. I’ll deny premise (3) which says that
reactive representations are a kind of besire.
Reactive representations certainly play some the causal roles that beliefs and
desires do. But recall that a besire is supposed to be both a belief and a desire.
Importantly, as I hope to make clear, it’s a type of state that is both a belief with a
certain content and desire with certain content. This is in contrast with the idea that
there might be a token state which is both a belief and a desire.
To see this consider this characterization by Smith of the problem that besires pose
for Humeans:
W]hat Humeans must deny and do deny is simply that agents who are in belief- like states and
desire-like states are ever in a single, unitary, kind of state. . . . And their argument for this
claim is really quite simple. It is that it is always at least possible for agents who are in some
particular belief-like state not to be in some particular desire-like state; that the two can always
be pulled apart, at least modally. This according to Humeans, is why they are distinct
existences. (Smith 1994: 119)
The thought here is that if you are in a belief-like state, there is no necessary
connection to any desire-like state. If I believe that there are possums around me, and
I desire to flee, it’s always (logically) possible for me to be in the same belief state but
some other desire state: perhaps wanting to cuddle them. But if the belief that
possums are around, and the desire to flee, are the very same state—a besire which
is both a belief and a desire—then that isn’t logically possible. For this state (which is
the belief that possums are around) is in part individuated by also being the desire to
flee possums. Should I no longer desire to flee possums, I am no longer in the same
state: so I no longer have the belief that there are possums around. This violates the
Humean doctrine that for any belief, I may combine it with any desire.
This is a doctrine I subscribe to, so this thought should affect me. And it does. If
besires are both beliefs and desires in the sense that the belief that P and the desire
that Q could both be type identical to a particular state which has belief-like features
and desire-like features, then I am persuaded that there are none.
 
  96
David Lewis’ more complicated arguments (Lewis 1988, 1996), which I shan’t
discuss in detail here, nevertheless depend I think on a similar thought. The rules for
evolution of beliefs and desires are different. By “rules” here we mean something like
the patterns of evolution which are constitutive of being a belief or a desire. If there is
one state which is both a belief and desire in this type sense, the rules of evolution for
belief allow it to change in a way which has no effect on its motivational aspects. But
that means it’s still the same desire—except it isn’t, because desires were meant to be
identical to states which have the representational features we have evolved away
from. Similarly the rules for evolution of desire allow us to evolve away from our
desire profile without affecting the world-head aspect of the state. Since the worldhead
aspects have not changed, we have the same original belief. But by hypothesis
our desires have evolved, so we do not possess the same desire. But the original belief
we possessed was supposed to be identical with this desire, so we cannot have the
original belief and fail to possess the desires. So the desired hypothesis in its most flat
footed form leads to contradiction. So that’s why there can’t be any besires, if by
besire you mean a type of state that is both a certain belief and a certain desire, and by
“is both a certain belief and a certain desire” you mean type identical to both. But are
reactive representations besires?
No. Because they aren’t type identical to beliefs or desires. Consider the reactive
representation ‘UGHPOSSUM’. Someone who tokens it perhaps does token, in belief
and desire terms, the belief there is a possum and the desire to run away.¹8 So
‘UGHPOSSUM’ plays a role, perhaps, of being the realizer of the belief that there
is a possum, and the desire to avoid possums. But it is not type identical to either.
Should we evolve in such a way that we no longer take there to be possums around,
but are still disposed to run should there be some, then we no longer have the belief
that there are possums, we no longer have the RR UGHPOSSUM but we still have the
desire to avoid possums, albeit now realized differently. So the RR UGPOSSUM is
not identical to the desire to avoid possums, even though it may realize it on
occasion. Equally, if we remain in a state which covaries with possums, while
somehow coming to tolerate them, we may still be in a state which we can call a
belief that there are possums around, but we are no longer in UGHPOSSUM, nor do
we desire to avoid them. Thus UGHPOSSUM is not identical to the belief that there
are possums around, though again it may realize it from time to time.
So a reactive representation is not type identical to any belief, or any desire. A besire,
on at least some understandings—the ones that make them problematic—is something
that is type identical to both a belief and a desire. Thus RRs are not besires, thus premise
3 of the above argument is false and the argument fails.
Why do I keep saying type identical here, as though I have a contrast in mind? If
fact this is optional. I could just say that the RR is not identical to a belief or desire,
but that at some times the RR is a realizer of both the belief and desire (or perhaps
that some neural state realizes both the RR, the belief and the desire). When desire
¹8 Actually I’mnot sure we should say that she necessarily tokens the desire to run away. Maybe she only
has the desire to run away if the basis for her disposition to run from possums is a more general state that is
capable of interacting with various different beliefs.
 
  97
evolution happens so that we no longer desire to flee possums, but still believe there
are some, the token physical state that realized the belief that there were possums and
a desire to avoid them is no longer present, but some other physical state exists which
realizes the belief that there are possums without realizing the desire to avoid them.
The RR too no longer exists. Problem solved.
But type identity talk, as the reader may have guessed, is useful for its contrast with
token identity. Exactly how much sense the type token identity distinction makes is
controversial. Nothing I say here depends on it being a good distinction, but I take
talking about it to be helpful. This is because it explains the sense in which it’s easy to
see that people think that any kind of talk which is even close to besire talk, is taking
seriously the idea of a belief being identical to a desire. And if you think that, you
might think the same about RRs, and therefore be puzzled why the standard
objections to besires don’t apply.
Here then is the thought: you might think that the RR is token-identical to a token
of the belief that possums are near, and a token of the desire to avoid possums.
Another way of putting this is of course to say that there is just one token state: in
virtue of certain features it’s right to call it the RR ‘UGHPOSSUM’. In virtue of
others it’s right to call it a token of the belief that there are possums, in virtue of yet
other features its right to call it a token of the desire to avoid possums. What
happens when that stage changes, so that, for example, it no longer serves the role
of generating possum avoidance? The token state at one level of individuation no
longer exists. Nor does the desire to avoid possums. But the belief that there are
possums does, now realized by a successor token to the original one. Perhaps it will
help to think of the relationship between beliefs and desires and RRs as the
underlying token states change as something like a counterpart relation: perhaps
analogous to Ted Sider’s temporal counterpart relation (Sider 2001), except rather
than all counterpart relations being of one kind (in Sider’s case person counterparts),
we can help ourselves to Lewis’ notion of the same thing having different
counterparts under different counterpart relations. So the initial state is token
identical to a belief (that there are possums around), a desire (to avoid possums),
and an RR (because the connection between the representation and the behaviour is
extremely direct. Suppose the state evolves in such a way as to no longer motivate
possum avoidance. The new state bears the belief-counterpart relation to the original
state (and so we say in ordinary language that the agent has the same belief) but not
the desire or RR counterpart. Suppose the state evolves over time in a way that
results in the agent no longer behaving as though there is a possum around, but still
having the disposition to avoid possums. The new state bears the desire counterpart
relation to the original state, so we say it is the same desire, but does not bear the
belief or RR counterpart relation. Suppose the state, or the agent, evolves in such a
way that the agent will act as though there are possums around, still is disposed to
avoid them, but that these features are less direct and automatic: the aspect of the
agent which registers the possum has to interact cognitively with an interrogable
desire to avoid them to produce the behaviour. Then the state bears the belief
counterpart relation to the original state, and the desire counterpart relation to
the original state, but not the RR counterpart relation. So we say she has the same
belief and desire, but not the same RR.

  98
5. Conclusion
In some ways this chapter has been an advertisement for a research programme.
What the advertisement does is suggest that there will be substantial explanatory
benefits to the idea of an R-concept and its associated RR, and that many of these are
of special interest to conceptual ethics and conceptual engineering. If there are such
things they may not only explain apparent disagreements where there is not underling
disagreement of facts (like the survival case) but also lay bare what is at stake in
proposals to reform or change such concepts. The idea unifies puzzles about phenomenal
concepts, crypto-evaluative terms, and hate speech. It might explain what is
at issue between people who are arguing about crypto-evaluative terms (and perhaps
other thick moral terms) and thus when the different participants can or should
revise their usage. It provides a tempting explanation of how hate-concepts might be
associated with hate speech, and how such concepts differ from merely descriptive
ones associated with inflammatory words. It is suggestive of mechanisms where bias
can be purely implicit, and inaccessible to an agent honestly interrogating her beliefs
and desires. It is equally suggestive of how it might be that linguistic intervention can
generate better consequences than just hiding people’s racist or otherwise biased
attitudes. One way in which this is a very different approach to, say, Haslanger’s
(2000) view is for her it’s much more important what the ‘input’ conditions are: what
it takes descriptively to fall under a concept. Reasons for linguistic intervention in the
concepts we have will fall on the side of the social consequences of categorization.
I add to this the consequences for the concept possessor; in what possessing such a
concept makes one do over and above categorization.
All of this requires that we really have such mental states, but the explanatory
merits of it seem to highlight the importance of the empirical project of determining
whether we do. But this chapter has at least done some of the groundwork in ruling
out two tempting a priori objections: that R-concepts function in such an odd way
that even if things a bit like them exist, they don’t do any of the work that would
justify seeing them as a kind of concept, and that they require use to possess besires.

99

 
 
  100
5
Strategic Conceptual Engineering
for Epistemic and Social Aims
Ingo Brigandt and Esther Rosario
Conceptual analysis, as traditionally practiced by philosophers, consists in articulating
a concept by means of imagining various scenarios and using one’s intuition as
to whether or not the concept (e.g., the concept           or the concept
         ) applies to a given case (Jackson 1998; Brigandt 2011). This approach
makes explicit the concept one currently happens to possess. In contrast, the project
of conceptual engineering attempts to put forward the most suitable concept for a
philosophical task, which may well require revising or abandoning one’s current
concepts. Kevin Scharp (2013) champions this approach when arguing that the
concept of       is inconsistent and theoretically unsuitable and that it should be
replaced with several successor concepts. In what follows we primarily use the label
‘conceptual engineering’ for this general approach, although another option is to
employ the term conceptual ethics, as advocated by Alexis Burgess and David
Plunkett (2013a,b), given that the latter label highlights normative questions, such
as what makes one concept better than another one, which concepts should be used,
and which concepts should be discarded (see also Plunkett and Sundell 2013;
Plunkett 2015, 2016). A prominent illustration of this philosophical practice is the
prior work by Sally Haslanger (2000, 2004, 2005, 2006) on the concepts        and
    . Her “ameliorative analysis” of gender and race, with definitions that incorporate
the hierarchical social treatment of different genders and races, deliberately
deviates from standard definitions (even philosophical ones), so as to provide new
concepts meant to serve feminist and anti-racist aims.
We contribute to discussions on how to construe        and     , where our
reflections on these concrete cases will also provide guidelines for the general
philosophical project of conceptual engineering. In this essay, we put forward various
suggestions without endeavouring to articulate a specific concept of        or     .
In fact, our general position will be that there is no unique, privileged concept of
either        or     .¹ Rather than an alleged all-purpose concept, what is needed
is a plurality of concepts of        and     , each of which is geared toward certain
¹ In addition to Jennifer Saul’s (2006, 2012) proposals, which we will encounter below, there have been
other discussions attempting to put forward a uniquely correct concept of gender (Stone 2004; Bach 2012).
 
 
 
  101
epistemic and/or social aims. We dub the development of a concept for a specific
thought and action context—combined with an openness to employing another
concept when pursuing other aims—strategic conceptual engineering. We will illustrate
this approach by sketching three distinct concepts of       , all of which are
needed because each serves a different social aim.
By ‘concepts’ in general we mean components of a person’s thought which can
influence reasoning as well as action. Concepts have the latter capacity by means of
embodying descriptive and/or normative beliefs (some of which may be implicit).
This is not a purely externalist construal of concepts, that would locate all aspects of
conceptual content outside of a person’s cognitive life. Our reason for including and
in fact focusing on narrow conceptual content is methodological (for a more detailed
account, see Brigandt 2011). The project of conceptual engineering consists in
adjudicating why adopting and using one concept is most conducive (or in any
case more conducive than another one concept) for conducting a given intellectual or
practical task. For this philosophical project, aspects of content that impact thought
or action (such as descriptive or normative beliefs) have to be invoked, so that one is
in a position to count a person’s adoption of a novel concept or a modification to a
concept as a change—and possibly an improvement—in their intellectual or practical
capabilities. (The same holds for the study of scientific concepts addressed in the next
section.) A purely externalist approach, in contrast, might acknowledge that a
person’s beliefs have changed, while maintaining that the concept (e.g., the externally
established referent) has not. But then such an approach would use the notion of
‘concept’ such that it fails to actively address what is actually relevant for the purpose
of conceptual engineering and conceptual ethics.²
Before turning to conceptual engineering in the concrete context of        and
     as concepts that have exercised philosophers, we begin with a look at scientific
concepts.
Lessons from Scientific Concepts
Not only concepts used by philosophers are in need of improvement (as the agenda
of conceptual engineering underscores), but also scientific concepts are routinely
revised. Indeed, the investigation of concept change and semantic variation in
biology that has been conducted by one of us (Brigandt 2010, 2011, 2012) can
provide guidance for the philosophical project of conceptual engineering and conceptual
ethics. The motivation for attempting to understand concept change in
science is the following.
Scientists are never hostage to the definitions they once used, and upon the arrival
of a novel theoretical perspective they may redefine a term. For example, with the
advent of molecular genetics the                concept gave rise to the significantly
different                concept (Brigandt 2010). The          concept
(referring to the corresponding structures in different species) was introduced well
² Our motivation for not using a purely externalist construal of concepts can be seen as an instance of
conceptual engineering pertaining to the philosophical concept        , as it adopts a certain notion of
        because it is more fruitful for the philosophical task at hand (Brigandt 2011).
 
                                                        
 
 
  102
before the advent of Darwin’s evolutionary theory, and only later came to be given a
definition that appeals to common ancestry (Brigandt 2012). Yet Kuhn (1962) and
Feyerabend (1962) prominently claimed that a term being used within different
theoretical frameworks amounts to ‘incommensurable’ concepts. Outside of philosophy
of science, some have likewise deemed the changing of a term’s definition as
illegitimate by framing it as a “change of subject” (see also Prinzing 2018). For
instance, in their argument against a naturalistic reduction of consciousness,
Chalmers and Jackson (2001) acknowledge that future neuroscientists may put
forward what these scientists would call a naturalistic concept of              .
But Chalmers and Jackson insist that this different concept would be irrelevant to
their claims about consciousness involving the current concept of consciousness,
where they do not allow for there being good reasons to replace the concept with a
revised one (Brigandt 2013).
Thus, the question is how it can in fact be legitimate for scientists to revise a
concept. We do not have a clear answer to the notoriously difficult question of how to
individuate concepts. But this does not matter for our purposes, because regardless of
whether a change is framed as an enduring concept being modified (in features not
affecting its identity) or as one concept being replaced by a different concept
associated with the same term (see also Richard, Chapter 17, this volume), the project
is to understand why the new concept is the better one to use. To do so, the crucial
move is to view a concept as being used by scientists to pursue a specific scientific aim,
because this aim—Brigandt (2010) dubs it the ‘epistemic goal’ of a concept—sets the
standards for whether one definition of a concept is superior to another definition. In
line with the aims that individual scientists pursue, such an epistemic aim is not a
global aim of science (e.g., putting forward explanations), but a local aim that is
pursued by only some scientists in a certain context, for example, explaining programmed
cell death, or having the ability to experimentally manipulate molecular
pathways involved in cell-cell signalling.
The novel philosophical claim is to point out that there are cases where a scientific
aim can be tied to an individual concept in that this concept is being used by scientists
to pursue this aim. For example, while the                concept was used for the
purpose of predicting (and statistically explaining) phenotypic patterns of inheritance
across generations, the                concept serves the aim of causalmechanistically
explaining how inside a cell a gene leads to the formation of its
molecular product. Making explicit such an aim tied to a concept’s use permits one to
account philosophically for the rationality of concept change: a revised definition is
an improvement over an earlier definition if the former is empirically more conducive
to meeting this aim (Brigandt 2010).³ While concepts are typically construed as
beliefs about the concept’s referent and philosophy of science has traditionally
articulated various representations of natural phenomena, the inclusion of scientists’
investigative, classificatory, or explanatory aims to one’s philosophical study of
³ While this account was developed independently of work outside of philosophy of science (and more
explicitly emphasizes the philosophical role of aims), it aligns with Haslanger’s ameliorative project about
philosophical concepts: “on my view, whether or not an analysis is an improvement on existing meanings
will depend on the purposes of the inquiry” (Haslanger 2005: 24, emphasis added).
 
                                    
 
 
  103
scientific concept use adds an additional dimension, as aims are values pertaining to
what human practice is to achieve.
In addition to diachronic conceptual differences (e.g., concept change in the
history of science), another common situation is synchronic semantic variation
across different scientists. The latter can likewise be captured by a philosophical
framework emphasizing the notion of epistemic aims (which also provides guidelines
for philosophical studies of concepts outside of science). For example, genes do not
form a unique structural kind, resulting in a plethora of different (although overlapping)
contemporary uses of the term ‘gene,’ where even one and the same biologist
can use the concept differently in different contexts. Such semantic variation can be
philosophically understood and seen to be conducive to scientific practice in case
distinct uses of a term serve somewhat different scientific aims. In the case of the
               concept as used currently, one can make the case that there is still
one generic epistemic aim shared across all uses of the term, while individual uses
may differ in the specific epistemic aim pursued by a person in this context (Brigandt
2010). Another case in point is that biologists use various         concepts, which
cross-classify organisms. Philosophers have argued that a plurality of         concepts
is needed to serve different scientific purposes (Kitcher 1984). The conceptual
diversity in biology suggests a first lesson for the philosophical project of conceptual
engineering. It may well be that one definition cannot serve all the legitimate aims
associated with a philosophical notion, so that philosophers should be open to a
pluralism that permits different concepts, each of which is most conducive in some
context (see also Burgess and Plunkett 2013b).
Apart from philosophers accounting for conceptual differences in biology in terms
of scientific aims, there are cases where the scientists themselves are aware of the fact
that their semantic differences are due to a concept being used for different purposes
by different approaches or different biological fields—the diversification of the
         concept during the last three decades is a case in point (Wagner 1989;
Roth 1991; see also Brigandt 2003). But in general, the aims for which scientific
concepts are used and reshaped are only implicit in scientific practice, which also
results in instances of biologists talking past each other when being oblivious of the
fact that their semantic disagreement is due to individually legitimate, yet different
scientific aims being at stake. This yields another lesson for conceptual engineering. It
can be beneficial to explicitly articulate the aim that a philosophical concept is to
serve, in particular if others implicitly use the same term for quite different purposes.
Subsequently showing that one’s proposed concept serves this purpose better than
traditional alternatives is no easy task, given that a concept may be meant to serve
several related aims, but being explicit about the aims at stake is a fruitful first step.
Philosophy of science accounts of concept change have appealed to epistemic aims
and values, rather than social aims and values. But this should not be construed as an
endorsement of a dichotomy between epistemic aims and social aims. Indeed, even
though some do construe ‘epistemic’ narrowly as only those features pertaining to
truth (Douglas 2009), the above examples of epistemic aims included explanatory
aims—which go beyond aiming at truth given that not every true scientific representation
is explanatory of a phenomenon and given that causal and mechanistic
explanation is also related to the practical ability of effectively intervening in nature.
 
                                                        
 
 
  104
More generally, the specific aims pursued by scientists typically combine more
epistemic and more practical considerations, from pragmatic constraints on research
(e.g., not pursuing a question that one cannot answer given data and computational
limitations) to intended applications that implicate pharmaceutical or environmental
aims (Kitcher 2001). This entwinement of the epistemic and the social also holds for
scientific concepts and categories, which can implicitly embody non-epistemic values,
or at least their use can be criticized based on such values (Brigandt 2015). That
said, many general discussions of scientific concepts have tended to focus on more
epistemic aims, so it is now time to turn to concepts that explicitly serve socialpolitical
aims.
Engineering Concepts in the Context of Biosocial
Phenomena: Gender and Race
Among the concepts that answer not only to empirical facts and epistemic aims but
also to social-political aims, our discussion focuses on        and     . We do not
somuch endeavour to put forward a clearly articulated concept of        or of     
(and later on will also argue that a plurality of        and      concepts is needed).
Instead, our primary agenda is to offer methodological remarks on how to engineer
these concepts, with implications for other concepts relevant to philosophers
engaging in conceptual engineering and conceptual ethics. Before also addressing
the notion of     , we begin with       .
Sally Haslanger (2000)—while explicitly acknowledging that there may be further
concepts of       —prominently put forward the following definition of      
(we do not restate her analogous definition of    ):
S is a woman iff
(i) S is regularly and for the most part observed or imagined to have certain bodily
features presumed to be evidence of a female’s biological role in reproduction;
(ii) that S has these features marks S within the dominant ideology of S’s society
as someone who ought to occupy certain kinds of social position that are in fact
subordinate (and so motivates and justifies S’s occupying such a position); and
(iii) the fact that S satisfies (i) and (ii) plays a role in S’s systematic subordination,
that is, along some dimension, S’s social position is oppressive, and S’s satisfying (i)
and (ii) plays a role in that dimension of subordination. (Haslanger 2000: 42)
One motivation for this definition is prior scepticism about the possibility of putting
forward a coherent concept of       . S   and        have traditionally been
distinguished, with sex pertaining to biological features, while gender roughly being
the social meaning of sex. But it has been questioned whether sex is independent of
social construction (Butler 1990, 1993). And the idea of gender being constituted by
certain social features may commit one to postulating a sort of social essence of
gender, which is unacceptable given that different women can face different social
expectations, occupy different social positions, and can have radically different social
experiences (as shown vividly by considerations about intersectionality). By falsely
maintaining that all women share certain social properties, any definition of ‘woman’
 
                                    
 
 
  105
would effectively privilege certain forms of femininity while excluding others. This
casts doubt on whether it is advisable for a feminist to ever put forward a specific
definition of ‘woman,’ yet at the same time it is unclear who the target of feminist
activism is if it does not pertain to women, as a socially construed category (Alcoff
1988; Heyes 2000; Stone 2004).
By not assuming that women must have a unique, shared psychological identity or
identical social experiences, Haslanger’s above account circumvents these problems
and instead focuses on the point that, because of their gender, women tend to occupy
disadvantaged social positions. This provides not only an idea that can unite feminist
activists, it more generally is a concept that is geared toward addressing legitimate social
aims. Haslanger’s concept of        and her proposed concept of      (which
likewise highlights discrimination and differential social privilege) are meant to be
“effective tools in the fight against injustice,” and their development was guided by
the “need to identify and explain persistent patterns of inequalities between females and
males, and between people of different ‘colors’” (Haslanger 2000: 36).
At the same time, Haslanger’s account has been criticized for maintaining that
women are by definition those female persons who are subordinated. Jennifer Saul
(2006), responding to Haslanger (2006) and her earlier writings, charges that
Haslanger’s account is not even acceptable to feminists as one of her primary target
audiences (see also Mikkola 2009). Haslanger favours a society where there are no
subordinated women, that is, no women as defined by her. She thus is seen to commit
herself to the social goal of the “elimination of women,” a goal when stated in these
terms “may well alienate many of those who would be most likely to support antioppression
movements” (Saul 2006: 139). Saul’s central worry is that using a term like
‘woman’ with a meaning that departs from standard usage is bound to create confusion.
Consequently, in this early commentary, Saul (2006) prefers to use ‘woman’ and ‘man’
as denoting biological sex (in line with what she considers ordinary use and devoid of
social factors like subordination), indicating that she does not think that ordinary
speakers even use ‘gender’ as a social category that is distinct from ‘sex.’
To our minds, Saul’s perspective has problems, a discussion of which offers lessons
for the project of conceptual engineering beyond the case of gender. First, Saul’s
criticism of Haslanger focuses on terminology, on how to linguistically use a given
term, and on communication across speakers (and the same holds for Mari Mikkola’s
2009 objections to Haslanger). This ignores the question of what concepts to use,
where concepts are vehicles of thought—broadly understood as also motivating
action—that can be employed by an individual regardless of communication by
means of language. The issue is what overall set of concepts are needed within a
larger community of agents (given their diverse legitimate aims), and by implication,
what novel concepts may have to be developed. In their proposal of the project of
conceptual ethics, Burgess and Plunkett (2013a) rightly assume that questions about
what concepts to employ and questions about what terms to use to express them
linguistically are separate issues.4 This is also something that Haslanger recognized:
4 “That we ought to use concept C does not yet settle how we should lexicalize it, for example” (Burgess
and Plunkett 2013a: 1095).
 
                                                        
 
 
  106
At this point we should bracket the terminological issues and just consider whether the groups
in question are the ones that are important to consider given the goals of our inquiry.
(Haslanger 2000: 46–7)
In our view, considerations about concepts are vital—even when the issue of
terminology is disregarded—given that “our conceptual repertoire determines not
only what we can think and say but also, as a result, what we can do and who we can
be” (Burgess and Plunkett 2013a: 1091). Indeed, as the previous section on scientific
concepts has hinted at, a concept is meant for certain intellectual or practical
purposes and thus to be used in some contexts only. A community and even one
person can fruitfully employ a variety of different concepts depending on the context.
This makes room for the possibility that Haslanger’s novel (or some similar) concept
of        is fruitful, at least when the identification and explanation of gender-based
discrimination is at stake, even if other cognitive contexts require different concepts
of       .5 Consequently, our recommendation is to first address questions about
what concepts are fruitful, and only then to discuss the (admittedly difficult) question
of what terms to use to express them, for example, whether a newly engineered
concept should be associated with an existing term, to which another concept is
already tied, or whether to introduce a new term for this novel concept (see also
McPherson and Plunkett, Chapter 14, this volume). (We will comment in the
concluding section on what terminology may be best for public discourse despite
our pluralistic approach to        concepts.)
Second, even when side-stepping the domain of concepts and moving on to
considerations about communication, while Saul is rightly worried about the possibility
of misunderstandings, this may lead to a problematic preference for sticking to
the common use of terms:
It seems to me that communication is difficult enough as it is, and that we should instead try to
use ordinary terms in as ordinary a way as possible. (Saul 2006: 141)
Although there are serious questions about how one can realistically effect a widespread
change of common term use and when it is wise to attempt this, Saul’s bias
toward the status quo may be particularly precarious for ordinary terms, given that in
some cases such term uses are highly problematic and should be reformed, for
example, the past practice to use ‘rape’ so as to not consider marital rape as such.
In the context of concepts, such a bias is at odds with the very spirit of conceptual
engineering and conceptual ethics, which endeavours not only to introduce completely
novel concepts, but also to abandon or transform existing concepts to the
extent to which they are empirically flawed or unsuited for their intended purpose
(for other reasons to discard a folk concept, see McPherson and Plunkett, Chapter 14,
this volume).
5 Although Saul (2006) acknowledges the possibility of using the term ‘woman’ with different meanings
in different contexts, she rejects this option on grounds of misunderstanding in communication across
contexts, and thereby fails to evaluate whether using Haslanger’s concept can be fruitful in some contexts of
a person’s thought and action.
 
                                    
 
 
  107
We will get to the issue of concepts of        and      embodying problematic
empirical assumptions soon, but first we address the political purpose for which
Haslanger puts forward her ameliorative analysis. Saul does have this issue in view,
and argues that even with her preferred option of using ‘woman’ and ‘man’ as
denoting biological sex (and thus as synonymous to ‘female’ and ‘male,’ respectively),
a social explanation of inequalities is possible:
The explanation of persistent inequalities between females and males would begin from the
fact that females tend to be systematically subordinated to males. The next step would be to
analyse this systematic subordination and how it is perpetuated. (Saul 2006: 136)
However, Saul’s approach construes gender as a purely biological category and views
pointing to the social factors underlying gender-based discrimination as a second
step and thus as a separate issue.6 In contrast, Haslanger’s concept of        rightly
highlights that despite the biological aspects of gender, a proper understanding of the
matter has to explicitly include that the gender differences at hand are due to social
factors. There are many biosocial kinds that combine a mutual causal influence of
more biological and more social factors. And if the purpose of a concept referring to
such a kind is to be explanatory, a properly engineered concept has to include in its
content all the relevant causal factors and how they are entwined.7 Thus, for the
purpose of accounting for inequalities across the sexes, Haslanger’s concept of
       is superior to the concept     or a biological concept of        as the
one preferred by Saul (2006), even if Saul can in fact provide the social explanation by
adducing additional (non-biological) concepts.
A case where not only the entwinement of more biological and more social factors
matters to social-political aims, but where ordinary concepts can also embody
problematic empirical assumptions, is race. Historical and some current conceptions
of      assume racialism, in particular the idea that there are behavioural and
cognitive differences between human races and that these are due to biological
differences. Given that this is empirically false, Appiah (1996) has prominently
argued that there are no races—because there is nothing in reality corresponding
to this ordinary concept of      (see also Zack 1993). Others have instead opted for
using a different concept of      that discards false beliefs, for example, one that
focuses on the cultural construction of race. As Mallon (2006) points out, the
philosophers endorsing eliminativism, constructivism, and other rival positions on
6 Mikkola (2009: 581) says something similar: “There is nothing in my proposal that prevents feminists
from identifying and explaining persistent inequalities since this is a separate empirical task.” However, she
never explains what this empirical task is separate from—certainly it is not separate from Haslanger’s
agenda of providing a concept of ‘woman’ that identifies and explains persistent inequalities.
7 In the introduction we justified in general terms why a strongly externalist construal of concepts does
not work for our agenda, and instead concepts have to be construed as embodying relevant empirical (or
normative) beliefs. Yet a much deeper failure to appreciate that conceptual engineering is not the
acquisition of novel empirical knowledge by means of analysing current concepts, but the incorporation
of relevant content into a concept using previously acquired empirical knowledge, can be found in Mikkola
(2009: 580): “I am unconvinced that politically much, if anything, hangs on analysing [sic!] the concept
woman. In fact, to claim that by discerning the conditions for satisfying woman the content of feminist
policies is discovered, strikes me as extremely implausible.”
 
                                                        
 
 
  108
race actually agree on the basic empirical facts, and the preference for different
positions hinges on normative considerations (see also Ludwig 2014).
Given our focus on the conceptual engineering aim of capturing race-based
discrimination, what we want to highlight is the insight of Kaplan (2010) that even
if there are biological differences among races in a country, these may well be due to
social factors (see also Kitcher 2007: 315). His starting point is the partial success of
race-based medicine, for example, the drug BiDil recommended as a treatment to
prevent heart failure in African Americans. This suggests the existence of medical
and thus biological differences across some races, given that differential drug efficacy
presupposes different physiological features in different individuals. Yet Kaplan
argues that even if there are such differences, this does not entail that they are due
to alleged genetic differences across races (as shown by the different health of African
Americans and recent immigrants from Africa). Instead, in a context like the US, the
physiological and health differences may very well be due to social discrimination,
which affects diet, exposure to pollutants and toxins, and levels of stress experienced
(a risk factor for hypertension and heart disease). A further point of his is that the
label ‘race-based medicine’ erroneously suggests that this is to be dealt with as a
medical (rather than primarily social) problem. But what matters most for our
purposes is that the example of race reveals that some philosophical concepts that
aim at explaining social differences (or at exposing social discrimination) have to
capture the reciprocal influence of social and biological features.
A common motivation for overlooking the connection between the social and the
biological is the spectre of biological determinism. Some discussions of sex and
gender are also predicated on a nature-nurture dichotomy. The latter assumes that
as one layer there is nature, which is unaffected by how nurture builds on it as a
second layer. The dichotomy between the two alleged layers also takes for granted
that it is meaningful to claim either that nature constrains nurture or that nurture is
largely unconstrained by nature. The nature-nurture dichotomy, however, is empirically
false, and many biologists have abandoned it on the more profound ground
that it is a conceptually flawed and theoretically useless perspective (and instead have
come to emphasize the idea of phenotypic plasticity and other notions capturing the
entwinement of organismal development and environment; Pigliucci 2001).
How to promote concepts that avoid false empirical beliefs (such as a naturenurture
dichotomy or biological determinism) among the general public is a difficult
matter. Indeed, when anthropologists use the term ‘race’ at all, they usually use it in
the context of cultural identification, as they are rightly worried that using ‘race’ in
connection with biological (or at least genetic) features will trigger illicit connotations.
Nevertheless, the lesson for the philosophical project of conceptual engineering
is more obvious. Gannett (2010) points out that even discussions of race by philosophers
have tended to be conducted in terms of social constructivism vs. biological
realism (and a separation of the conceptual schemes of experts and laypersons), so as
to result in a problematic “dichotomization of the biological and the social” (p. 368).
While there are legitimate concepts of      that focus on cultural factors, our
discussion about biomedical differences across races being due to social discrimination
shows the need for some concept of      that captures in an empirically
adequate fashion how social and biological factors are in reality interrelated. The
 
                                    
 
 
  109
beliefs about race currently held across the general public of course fail to reflect this
emerging empirical account, but the fact that ordinary beliefs are not excluded from
being empirically flawed and potentially harmful—and may even be particularly
prone to be so, as racialist conceptions of race show—underscores yet again the
problem with Saul’s (2006) recommendation of trying to use concepts with their
ordinary meanings.8
Gender and the Inclusion of Trans Persons
Beyond the worry that a revised concept of        like Haslanger’s departs from
ordinary use (which above we found not to be compelling), there are important issues
to be addressed. For recent discussions of gender have emphasized the need to ensure
that the concept       include trans women (Bettcher 2013, 2017a; Kapusta
2016)). This is not only a problem for Haslanger’s account (as we will address
below), but Jennifer Saul likewise recognizes that her earlier approach (in Saul
2006) failed to include trans women because it favoured using ‘woman’ to denote
those persons who are biologically female.  Now Saul (2012) favours a contextualist
approach, which (in addition to an analogous definition of    ) construes the
concept       as follows:
X is a woman is true in a context C iff X is human and relevantly similar (according to the
standards at work in C) to most of those possessing all of the biological markers of female sex.
(Saul 2012: 201)
In some contexts, the standards may indeed entail that the relevant similarity
pertains to biological sex, but Saul discusses other similarity conditions. In this
fashion, she can capture persons with intersex conditions as well as trans persons,
where the latter fall under the gender category which with they identify.
At the same time, Saul has some misgivings about this contextualist approach, on
the grounds that it is too flexible and may permit using       with any meaning.
For instance, there are situations where biological and other similarity conditions are
operative according to which trans women are not women. Given this, Saul worries
that this makes a trans woman’s assertion that she is a woman true only in the specific
context in which she makes this utterance, and thus true in an utterly trivial fashion
(as opposed to it being a substantial, context-independent truth about this women’s
gender in line with her self-perception). The flipside of this issue is that also the
8 Another instance of concepts embodying empirically flawed assumptions (regardless of whether this
always aligns with ordinary meanings) is Saul’s suggestion to use ‘woman’ and ‘man’ as denoting biological
sex. This assumes that these are the only biological categories and that there is a unique account of
biological sex. Yet the diverse human conditions collectively called ‘intersex conditions’ shows not only
that sex is not a binary category (and instead a spectrum), but also that sex-related biological features such
as genes, chromosomes, hormones, internal/external sex organs, and secondary sex characteristics do not
always align, where even one person can possess chromosomally male and female cells (Ainsworth 2015;
see also Kessler 1990; Butler 1993).
  While we previously objected to Saul’s (2006) desideratum to use terms with their established,
ordinary meanings, we also do not think that ordinary use would support Saul’s earlier, exclusively
biological construal of      , given that laypersons’ actual use is more diverse and flexible, which
often includes trans women.
 
                                                        
 
 
  110
statements of those lawmakers who claim trans women to not be women (and who
pass laws that prohibit trans women from using women’s washrooms) seem to come
out as true. Saul’s worry is that one may have to grant that in these lawmakers’ context
the standards are such that their biological construal of       obtains.
Saul sees the option of insisting that her own standards, rather than those of
transphobic lawmakers, are the right ones. Yet she frames this approach as follows:
On my view of “woman,” I cannot argue that the lawmakers are making a mistake about how
the word “woman” works. But what I can do is argue that they are morally and politically
wrong to apply the standards that they do. . . . But we must recognize this claim for what it is: a
moral and political, rather than merely linguistic, claim. (Saul 2012: 204)
Saul correctly recognizes that moral and political considerations are involved; however,
she seems to view them as separate from and something over and above
language use. A dichotomy between concept use and moral-political values should
not only be alien to philosophers engaged in the project of conceptual ethics (see also
Plunkett 2015; Díaz-León, Chapter 9, this volume; McPherson and Plunkett,
Chapter 14, this volume). As we have explained above, also scientists revise their
language use and disagree on how to use a scientific term in part because of the values
and scientific aims they favour, which can include environmental, applicationrelated,
and other practical aims. Furthermore, there is the widespread phenomenon
of ordinary discourse where a disagreement is not about the object being talked about,
but about what concept should be used to describe the object. This negotiation about
what particular concept (e.g., what construal of      ) to use in a certain context has
been dubbed ‘metalinguistic negotiation’ by David Plunkett and Tim Sundell (2013);
and they argue that metalinguistic disagreements can be substantial disagreements
(as among other things they influence action, e.g., whether to add more spice).¹°
Metalinguistic negotiation is linguistic (or about how a certain word works, as Saul
puts it), but at the same time based on aesthetic, moral, or political values.
In her response to Saul’s discussion, Esa Díaz-León (2016) rightly argues that
opting for the employment of moral and political considerations regarding the use of
‘woman’ can also be seen “as a genuinely linguistic point” (p. 248). The standards of
similarity that are at work in a given context matter for Saul’s contextualism, yet
“questions about the relevant standards might involve moral and political considerations
(and in cases that concern the rights of trans women, will very likely do so)”
(Díaz-León 2016: 249). Díaz-León points to the distinction between attributor factors
and subject factors that has been invoked in epistemic contextualism. In a situation
where person A wonders whether or not subject S counts as knowing that p,
attributor contextualism maintains that this is contingent on the context of knowledge
attributor A, that is, attributor factors determine the standards. In contrast,
some have objected that instead it better be subject factors (the context of putative
¹° In the ‘Lessons from Scientific Concepts’ section we critically mentioned Chalmers and Jackson’s
(2001) tenet that it is illicit to associate a term with a different concept (a situation which they frame as a
“change of subject”). Yet such metalinguistic negotiation can very well be legitimate; in fact, the target of
Plunkett and Sundell’s (2013) criticism is the idea that meaningful disagreement always presupposes that
two speakers use the same concept (and make different claims with it).
 
                                    
 
 
  111
knower S) that are relevant for setting the standards of knowledge. Díaz-León
suggests that the latter option—subject contextualism—should be used for the
concept      , in which case it is not the lawmakers’ context (or the context of
anyone else who may make claims as to whether a trans woman as a woman) that
matters, but the trans woman’s context:
according to subject-contextualism about woman, “X is a woman” is true iff X is human and
relevantly similar to most females, where what counts as relevantly similar to most females
depends on “objective” features of X’s context, including instrumental, moral, and political
considerations having to do with how X should be treated (regardless of who utters the
sentence or what their beliefs are). (Díaz-León 2016: 251)
Díaz-León’s approach strikes us as basically correct, though we add in way of
clarification that when person A uses a concept that refers to another person S, it
cannot always be the case (or be an a priori matter) that it is the latter person’s
context that is the relevant one. And to the extent that S’s context matters, it need not
be her beliefs or values that settle the issue. For instance, a trans woman may happen
to have a conception of       that diverges from the conception of other trans
women (and other women in general) and an adoption of which would be morally
and politically problematic in the given situation. Instead, in the case at hand
(positions taken by lawmakers about trans women), what is at stake is whether
trans women are treated equally to other women—an issue that also follows from
the context of a transphobic lawmaker (the attributor context). Regarding the
question of equal treatment, the proper social-political aim is that trans women are
accorded the same rights as other women (regardless of whether given their personal
values some lawmakers or trans women may disagree). Thus, the lesson is that the
philosophical focus should be on the relevant and legitimate aims (which may not
be the aims of either the attributor or the subject of an utterance), which must be
identified and have to be justified as legitimate (even if they already happen to
be agreed upon). We shall use this advice in the remainder of the section, in which
we also highlight that a particular concept       has to be geared to a specific aim.
The desideratum that trans persons ought to be fully included by a philosophical
account of gender has recently been reiterated by Katharine Jenkins (2016). Her
critical target is Haslanger’s earlier ameliorative concept      , and Jenkins argues
that it excludes trans women by counting many trans women as men. The definition
by Haslanger requires of a woman that the person be “regularly and for the most part
observed or imagined to have certain bodily features presumed to be evidence of a
female’s biological role in reproduction” (Haslanger 2000: 42), yet Jenkins points to
several cases where some trans women would not fall under this definition: she may
be respected as a woman regardless of not being deemed to have a female’s reproductive
role, she may not publicly present as a woman, or—particularly
problematically—her public gender presentation is not respected by others as being a
woman. To remedy this issue, Jenkinsmakes the useful distinction between two relevant
concepts of       . While the first one,                , is basically Haslanger’s
ameliorative concept, Jenkins puts forward her account of                   , which
is to properly include trans persons. In the next section, we will say more on the way in
which both concepts of gender are needed, but now focus on the latter.
 
                                                        
 
 
  112
Jenkins puts forward the following definition of                    (for the
category of woman):
S has a female gender identity iff S’s internal ‘map’ is formed to guide someone classed as a
woman through the social or material realities that are, in that context, characteristic of women
as a class. (Jenkins 2016: 410)
Although Jenkins makes the crucial claim that “this definition of gender identity
entails that all trans women have a female gender identity” (p. 413), in our view this
entailment claim is highly dubious, given that Jenkins articulates her notion of an
‘internal map’ as follows:
On my definition, having a female gender identity does not necessarily involve having
internalized norms of femininity in the sense of accepting them on some level. Rather, what
is important is that one takes those norms to be relevant to oneself; . . . Her experience of social
and material reality includes navigating the norm that women should have hairless legs, even
though she is not complying with it. (Jenkins 2016: 411)
But even taking gender norms relevant to oneself (without necessarily accepting
them) is too strong a condition. On Jenkins’s account, a trans woman who happens
to be oblivious of the norm that women should shave their legs is not a woman (and
the same holds for cis women who are unaware of this particular norm). And from
the perspective of the project of conceptual engineering and conceptual ethics, why
would the inclusion of norms like shaving one’s legs be relevant to a trans-inclusive
concept       in the first place 
The problem is not just that with leg-shaving Jenkins has used a poor example of a
relevant norm. Making explicit that this norm is meant for gender identity in
Western cultures or even using a different social norm would not help. In our
view, the whole point of putting forward a concept        that is trans-inclusive
is the social-political aim that trans women (and also cis women) are socially
accepted as the gender with which they identify, and have all the moral and legal
rights corresponding to their gender. One’s (sincere) self-identification as a woman
should suffice for this, and one should not make social and legal recognition as a
woman contingent on being aware of any gender-related norm, as Jenkins does. As
an analogy, take party membership, for example, being a Republican in the US. Of
course, Republicans tend to have many factual beliefs, political values, and social
practices in common that form their political identity, and these shared features are
important to sociologists and political scientists for predictive and explanatory
purposes (predictions and explanations that are useful even if there are some
Republicans that do not conform to the stereotype). However, Republicans who
are untypical in terms of their beliefs and values can still be party members and have
concomitant rights. For instance, being registered as a Republican voter (according to
state guidelines) suffices for being eligible to vote in a Republican primary—no
specific ideological test is required to possess this voting right.
In the case of gender, the fact that persons of one gender tend to have similar
internal maps and are aware that certain social norms and gender-related expectations
apply to them is likewise relevant for explanatory purposes, and is an aspect of
social-psychological gender identity that may indeed be relevant for some concept of
 
                                    
 
 
  113
      . Endorsing such social norms is required by a strong ideological test, while
merely being aware of the existence of these gender-related norms (as Jenkins
envisions) can be dubbed a weak ideological test. However, for the purpose of a
concept of        (or                ) that has the purpose of guaranteeing
gender-appropriate social recognition and rights (and that can usefully complement
Haslanger’s concept of                ), not even a weak ideological test should be
required to count as a woman (or as a man). In addition to the concern of excluding
trans women, recent female immigrants from other cultures may not be aware of
various gender-related social expectations (e.g., shaving one’s legs in a Western
culture) and not have them as part of their current internal map, yet this should be
no grounds to deny them social recognition as women and the rights that other
women have. In summary, for the specific social-political aim of achieving genderappropriate
recognition and rights, we advocate using a concept of        that
defines someone to be a woman or man solely in terms of this person’s sincere selfidentification
with a particular gender, for example, as long as someone identifies as
belonging to the gender commonly denoted by the term ‘woman.’¹¹ More precisely,
in many legal contexts ‘man’ and ‘woman’ are the only two categories, while for the
purpose of social recognition more than two genders may well be needed—but in this
case, the issue is also a person’s mere self-identification with a gender.
Strategic Conceptual Engineering
It is useful to view a concept as a tool that serves certain epistemic, social, and other
aims (Brigandt 2011; Burgess and Plunkett 2013b; Prinzing 2018; McPherson and
Plunkett, Chapter 14, this volume). While such aims are sometimes implicit in how a
concept is used and how it is revised, for the purpose of deliberate and effective
conceptual engineering our discussion has repeatedly emphasized the need to articulate
the aim at stake and to ensure that a concept employed actually embodies those
empirical facts that are conducive to this aim. This is admittedly easier said than
done. One hurdle is justifying that something is a legitimate aim, and to convince
others of its importance. Not only were, in the past, social aims deemed to be
legitimate that are nowadays repudiated, but disagreement about what the relevant
aims are exist even within contemporary academic subcommunities. While we
discussed several scholars (Saul, Díaz-León, and Jenkins) who endorse the desideratum
that a concept of ‘woman’ include trans women, there are unfortunately
feminists who oppose this based on a trans-exclusive stance on feminist identity
politics (Heyes 2006; Watson 2016; Bettcher 2017b; McKinnon 2018).
Moreover, it can be difficult to assess whether several related aims better be viewed
as separate in that they cannot all be fully met by one concept. For instance, when
putting forward her concept of       , Sally Haslanger (2000) singles out the need
¹¹ McKitrick (2007: 141) wonders about a proposal like ours: “Perhaps having a female gender identity
supervenes on the psychological property of having a strong and persistent belief that you are a woman.
But again, that merely pushes back the question: What exactly is it that you believe about yourself ” Here
our analogy with party membership is instructive, where all that is cognitively required is that one identify
as belonging to a collection of individuals picked out by such a label as ‘Republican’ or ‘woman.’
 
                                                        
 
 
  114
to “identify and explain persistent inequalities” (p. 36). But these could be viewed as
two distinct aims, and a concept that merely identifies patterns of discrimination may
not embody the relevant psychological and social factors that actually explain these
patterns. More importantly, beyond description and explanation—which could be
viewed as largely epistemic aims—Haslanger explicitly adopts the social-political aim
of fighting oppression, by means of providing conceptual “tools in the fight against
injustice” (p. 36). But as Jennifer Saul’s (2006) criticism highlights, if those in
subordinated positions rely on a concept that offers a causal explanation of systematic
discrimination (even when it highlights the social nature thereof), this may very
well motivate them to “become trapped in a feeling of powerless to change their own
fates” (p. 138). This raises the difficult question of whether the aim of explaining
discrimination and of opposing discrimination have sometimes—though not
always—to be addressed separately when engineering concepts. In addition to
identifying and explaining inequalities, Haslanger lists the “need for accounts of
gender and race that take seriously the agency of women and people of color of both
genders” (2000: 36), but it is doubtful that her definitions of        and     
actually capture the relevant agency, so this may be yet another aim that requires a
separate treatment. We will return to this difficult issue below by opting to separate
certain social aims insofar as quite different concepts of        are needed to
address each of them.
Regarding the question of how to construe race, it is clear that a traditional
biological conception that would posit significant phenotypic differences between
races and take them to be due to genetic differences between races is empirically false
(Rose et al. 2009; Hochman 2013; Pigliucci 2013; Yudell et al. 2016; Spencer 2018a).
Moreover, grouping humans into races is not even a major classificatory or explanatory
aim for contemporary population genetics (Templeton 2013; Kopec 2014).
A useful concept of race will therefore ensure to include the social factors that
influence how persons come to be deemed to be of a certain race (e.g., persons of
biracial ancestry considered to be black), how racial self-identity is generated, how a
race is perceived by others, and how persons from different races are treated within
society, so as to track the social dynamics of race. Despite the largely cultural nature
of race—which suffices for many epistemic and social purposes where a concept of
race is employed—our discussion has pointed out that biological features enter not
only in the trivial sense of skin colour and other phenotypic features being socially
conceptualized. The way that social discrimination can have actual physiological
effects that result in predispositions to disease matter if the aim is to offer a thorough
explanation of social dynamics, and at least when an explanation of health disparities
is sought after. A concept of race that highlights social impacts on biological features
is also conducive to the social aim of reducing discrimination, and of opposing
erroneous biological determinist conceptions (which have been promoted by the
idea of race-based medicine).
To be sure, these race-related health disparities hold for the context of the United
States; and philosophical commentators have indicated that race operates differently
and has another overall prominence in many other countries (Alcoff 2006), for
instance, when even in biomedical contexts the notion of           is more relevant
(Gannett 2010; Ludwig 2014). The best concept of      to employ in some
 
                                    
 
 
  115
Caribbean or South American contexts such as Cuba or Brazil may well be different
from one geared toward conditions in the US.¹² Different societies may not only
empirically differ in their social processes, but their different identity politics concerns
may result in different legitimate aims that a particular concept of race has to
serve. Thus, it appears that there is no unique concept of race that could capture all
cultural contexts and serve all epistemic and social aims.
Some may wonder whether a concept that includes all biological and social
features and distinguishes how they operate in different cultural (or historical)
contexts can function as an all-purpose concept after all. We doubt that this is an
option even for a concept of      (see also Hardimon 2017; Spencer 2018b). One
reason is that relative to one explanatory aim, a concept should only include what is
explanatorily relevant and thus not adduce any feature (no matter how true) that is
irrelevant to the phenomenon to be explained. Therefore, an explanatory concept
must exclude some aspects of reality, which however have to be included with respect
to some other explanatory aim. In the context of scientific concepts we have already
covered that biologists use, for instance, different species concepts because these
answer to different concrete biological aims.
In any case, a strong case against all-purpose concepts can be made in the case of
gender and political aims. We call not only for a plurality of concepts of       , but
for what we dub strategic conceptual engineering, which is the strategic employment
of a concept for certain epistemic or social aims, combined with the understanding
that this concept has a limited scope of application and the openness to use another
concept with respect to other aims. In what follows, we distinguish three different
social-political aims, and argue that different concepts of gender are needed to meet
each aim, respectively.
(1) Identifying and explaining gender-based discrimination. Haslanger’s definition
has been criticized, where the most noteworthy point has been that it fails to count
trans women as women. Yet this tension can be resolved if in line with the idea of
strategic conceptual engineering one views Haslanger’s concept as restricted to
particular aims.¹³ At the very least, Haslanger’s proposal, which highlights the
oppression of women (due to being women), was calculated to be strategically useful
when she put it forward, given that Haslanger reacted to scepticism within the
¹² For similar reasons, race and gender cannot be treated in a completely analogous fashion (Heyes
2006). The situation that both race and gender are widely held to be social constructions should not
obscure the fact that they do not socially function in the same way even within the same sociohistorical
context. In North America, gender is often treated by theorists as an individual property of the body or of a
person (centering on one’s psychological identity and social experiences), whereas race clearly implicates
ancestry and cultural history. In such contexts, a properly engineered concept of      would do well to
take heritage into account (while making room for the possibility of some people adapting a racial
reception that disavows or ignores a part or parts of their ancestry).
¹³ When distinguishing the concepts                 and                   , Jenkins (2016)
charges that Haslanger, although acknowledging different concepts of       , still privileges her ameliorative
account (i.e.,                ). This strikes us as false, given that Haslanger made plain that she
views any concept of        as tied to certain purposes: “Let me emphasize at the beginning that I do not
want to argue that my proposals provide the only acceptable ways to define race or gender; in fact, the
epistemological framework I employ is explicitly designed to allow for different definitions responding to
different concerns” (Haslanger 2000: 36).
 
                                                        
 
 
  116
feminist scholarly community about the relevance of even articulating a concept of
      (Alcoff 1988; Heyes 2000; Stone 2004), by providing a conceptual tool for the
aim of uniting feminist activism. An approach similar to Haslanger’s is in our view
also fruitful for the aim of identifying gender-based discrimination or of explaining
the social workings of this discrimination (so as to indicate how it could be remedied),
provided that the following constructive suggestions of ours are being used.
First, while Haslanger’s ameliorative definition—and the subsequent criticism—is
actually about the concept       (and    ), we suggest that (with respect to the
aim of identifying discrimination) the focus should be on the concept       , of
which one can offer a revised, ameliorative definition without also redefining      
and     (or without establishing any bold entailments about       and    ). An
advantage of this is that it shifts the focus away from questions about the extension of
concepts, such as the question of whether there are females that are not discriminated
against and thus not women on Haslanger’s definition.¹4 Sometimes the specific
extension of a concept does matter—as in the case of a concept of       that
attributes rights and social recognition to those classified as women (to which we
turn below). But concepts may have other virtues (e.g., exhibiting discrimination’s
systemic nature) than classificatory functions. An account in the present context
should be open to the boundaries of different genders being vague, to some persons
being of more than one gender, and to there being more than two genders. An
account of        is definitely not committed to any definitive specification of these
matters (while substantial expectations may obtain for a proposed definition of the
two terms ‘woman’ and ‘man’), and can even make room for the number of different
genders varying across cultural history. Beyond the (immediate) aim of identifying
discrimination, our approach would also be advantageous for Haslanger’s ultimate aim
of eliminating such social gender differences, as this agenda is now framed in terms of
the elimination of “gender” rather than in terms of the elimination of “women.”
Second, we advocate the use of relational accounts of        (and     ), in which
the construal of one gender makes reference to other genders or to the properties
used to characterize other genders (and in which different races are understood in
relation to each other). In contrast, the proposals by Saul we have mentioned,
including her contextualist definition of       (Saul 2012), do not make reference
to     (and the same holds for Jenkins’ 2016 construal of                ). Even
Haslanger’s account of ‘woman’ is not explicitly relational and instead her definition
of       focuses on intrinsic features of this category. A general drawback of using
only intrinsic features is that this way one has a hard time capturing variation within
any category, and in the case of gender variation is essential because “there is no one
‘women’s social role’” (Saul 2012: 197). A relational account points to the differential
social treatment of genders. It neither has to claim that all women are subordinated—
as Haslanger’s definition problematically does by excluding non-subordinated
¹4 Recognizing that her account of       raises this question, Haslanger (2000) is compelled to
respond that she “not convinced that there are many cases (if any) of the latter” (females who are not
subordinated for being considered female), while also stating that her “analysis is intended to capture a
meaningful political category for critical feminist efforts, and non-oppressed females do not fall within that
category” (p. 46).
 
                                    
 
 
  117
females—nor does it have to articulate what this allegedly shared social subordination
consist of, for example, the “certain kinds of social position” to which Haslanger
appeals in condition (ii) of her definition (which we restated in an earlier section).
Instead, a relational construal can indicate that compared to men, women tend to be
discriminated against because of their gender.
In our view, the decisive advantage of a relational approach is its ability to capture
intersectionality, that is, the way in which several social identities (gender, race, class,
sexual orientation, trans status, etc.) intersect for a particular person so as to
aggravate or attenuate oppression and privilege (Crenshaw 1989, 1991).¹5 When
focusing on        rather than       and articulating gender as an axis of
discrimination, this engineered concept flags that gender is only one axis of discrimination,
and is open to there being many others dimensions of discrimination (and
other salient features related to social differences) beyond gender, including race and
sexual orientation.¹6 Recall that this concept of        is to answer to the aim of
identifying (and possibly explaining) gender-based discrimination, which for empirical
and political reasons has to comport with intersectionality. A relational account
of        highlights the organized and systemic nature of gender-based discrimination,
without claiming that every woman is oppressed and that gender is the only
dimension of discrimination.
(2) Assigning legal rights and ensuring gender-appropriate social recognition. To be
sure, a relational concept of        fails to delineate exactly which persons are of a
certain gender, which is not relevant for the purpose of identifying and explaining
society-wide discrimination, but is indeed indispensable for the aim of ensuring
gender-based legal rights and social recognition in line with someone’s gender
identity. With respect to this aim, a different concept of gender has to be employed,
that entails a specific extension of       and other gender categories (and that has
a normative prong by assigning legal rights and social status to these persons).
Jenkins (2016) did put forward an account that is meant to ensure that trans
women count as women. However, we have argued that it fails to do so. For by
insisting that one needs to be aware of gender-specific social expectations, Jenkins’s
definition makes an individual person’s gender contingent on an ideological test
imposed by the larger culture. This is not only irrelevant but harmful, given that it
would not grant gender-based legal rights and social recognition of a person’s chosen
gender to someone who is unaware of some social expectations. In contrast, for the
aim of ascribing rights and social recognition, in the previous section we proposed a
concept of        according to which one’s sincere belief that one is of a particular
gender suffices. Although a woman’s psychological identity includes more substantial
¹5 Haslanger has intersectionality concerns clearly in view, regardless of whether her particular definitions
of     and       fully comport with this. For instance, Jones (2014) questions whether
indigenous Australian men (who are not privileged by any standard) count as     on Haslanger’s
definition, thereby also touching upon questions about the extension of concepts such as     and
      from which we have tried to move away. (A further discussion that is critical of Haslanger but
still focuses exclusively on the extensions of concepts is Mikkola 2009.)
¹6 Although our below concept of       that is to assign rights (and therefore has to include trans
women) is dedicated to trans issues, this does not mean that the present concept of        cannot
acknowledge trans status as yet a further axis of discrimination that is distinct from gender.
 
                                                        
 
 
  118
beliefs about what it means to be a woman, the belief that she belongs to the gender
category termed ‘woman’ is all that is required for her to be recognized and treated
accordingly.
(3) Empowering persons by means of their gender identity. A further social aim we
have not discussed yet is empowering groups of persons, for instance women. This
also requires a specific, strategic concept of       . Our first concept of        (the
concept in the spirit of Haslanger’s ameliorative account), when not only identifying
but also offering a more detailed explanation of the social workings of gender-based
discrimination, may point to public policy means of reducing discrimination within
an overall society. However, this may not be helpful for empowering individual
women. For this purpose, the best solution may be a concept of        that
incorporates substantial psychological aspects of gender identity, provided they are
positive features conducive to personal empowerment (rather than internalized
harmful stereotypes). Such psychological aspects of gender identity were deliberately
left out from our second        concept as self-identification with a particular
gender, so this concept is clearly unsuitable for the purpose of personal empowerment.
A concept serving the aim of an individual’s personal and social empowerment
needs to include relevant gender-related psychological resources and social affordances.
A person should be able to pick and choose amongst a variety of (nonbinary)
gender associated behaviours and activities in order to construct their own
particular gender attributes that enable agency. A clear limitation is that the psychological
and social features relevant to a particular individual do not hold for all
persons. Indeed, discussions on intersectionality have already shown that even
different persons belonging to one gender (e.g., all who identify as women on the
second gender concept) need different empowerment strategies, so that it is doubtful
that the task can be achieved by a single psychological identity concept, no matter
how flexible it is. But the employment of different psychological identity concepts by
different groups of persons is something that our agenda of strategic conceptual
engineering welcomes.
Conclusion
In this essay we have put forward the agenda of strategic conceptual engineering,
which in addition to the development of novel concepts consists in the employment
of a variety of concepts, such as several concepts of     , where each such concept is
geared toward a specific epistemic or social aim, while in other contexts the use a
different concept is more fruitful. We have illustrated this approach by arguing that
at least three concepts of        are needed, even when only social aims are in view.
With respect to the first aim of identifying and explaining gender-based inequities, a
concept similar to Haslanger’s ameliorative account is needed; although instead of
focusing on the extension of       we suggested a relational construal of       
which highlights differential social treatment across genders and thereby points to
gender as one (though not the only one) axis of discrimination. A second vital aim is
to assign gender-based legal rights and social recognition in line with one’s chosen
gender, so that such a concept must be trans-inclusive and offer a clear-cut account of
the extension of       and other gender categories. In contrast to Jenkins’s
 
                                    
 
 
  119
proposal, we argued that for the purpose of ensuring rights and social recognition,
awareness of gender-related social norms and other substantial psychological aspects
of one’s gender identity have to be omitted; and instead, one’s sincere belief to be of a
particular gender (e.g., the category labelled ‘woman’) suffices to count as being of
that gender. The third social aim is the empowerment of persons by means of their
gender identity. Now a further concept of        is needed, which does include
psychological features relevant to personal empowerment and awareness of one’s
social resources, where we acknowledged that even relative to this aim different
concepts may be needed given that different groups of persons have different social
experiences and occupy different social situations and thus may have to use different
empowerment strategies.
Beyond the specific case of gender, our strategic conceptual engineering diverges
from other general approaches. In particular, it goes in several respects beyond how
the known phenomenon of semantic contextualism is often conceived. First, strategic
conceptual engineering includes the creation of completely novel concepts and
meanings. Furthermore, it importantly articulates that the ‘context’ that determines
which meaning to use is specifically the epistemic or social aims at hand. And third,
whereas Saul’s (2012) contextualism assumes a unified definition of       across
all contexts (in terms of some similarity to most biological females, where only the
specific similarity metric differs across contexts), our three significantly distinct
concepts of        make plain that strategic conceptual engineering is open to
different contexts requiring completely different concepts. As previously mentioned,
we do not have a conclusive account of concept individuation (and for our agenda it
is more important to adjudicate whether a new conceptual variant—regardless of
whether it qualifies as a different concept—is an improvement). Yet paying attention
to the aims of concept use (in addition to a contentious similarity of conceptual
content) also contributes to the question of concept individuation: If one but not the
other concepts of        is in a position to meet a given social-political aim, this is a
reason to regard these three concepts as relevantly different (at least for this concrete
case of conceptual engineering). For instance, our second concept of        was put
forward precisely because our first one (building on Haslanger’s definition) does not
specify someone’s particular gender category (and thus this concept would not serve
the purpose of being trans-inclusive and assigning gender-based legal rights and
social recognition). Conversely, a concept in terms of one’s self-identification with a
certain gender category is not in a position to provide a causal explanation of how
gender functions as one axis of society-wide discrimination.
Our approach has also the potential to enrich philosophical views of concepts in
general. Discussions in the philosophy of mind and language commonly concern the
role that conceptual content has for determining the concept’s extension, that is, they
focus on a concept’s satisfaction conditions. When reflecting on some criticisms of
Haslanger’s account (driven by the question of who would fall under      ), we
have argued that (in this specific context) such considerations about the extension of
concepts are actually a red herring, given that some concepts do not serve the aim of
classification (or of assigning rights to a clearly delineated group of individuals), but
may serve the aim of causal explanation (e.g., of discrimination within society). Thus,
concepts should not only be philosophically studied in terms of their extensions and
 
                                                        
 
 
  120
satisfaction conditions, but also in terms of the way in which the content embodied in
a concept supports explanatory reasoning. Even our second concept of       
(where extensions matter) has not only a descriptive prong that specifies who counts
as falling under a certain gender category, but also a normative prong that entails
legal rights and a commitment to the social acceptance of a person’s gender identity,
so that this concept can function in moral reasoning (see also Reuter 2019).
The topic of our discussion was concepts as vehicles of thought which also
motivate action. An issue we have not covered is that the promotion of a useful
concept among a wider group of individuals (e.g., for political purposes or empowering
others) requires that a concept be communicated, which makes it necessary to
lexicalize it by using some term that expresses this concept. Although one option is to
use a single term such as ‘gender’ while having its meaning vary across contexts, we
have already encountered the worry that this may hamper communication across
persons. Mikkola (2009) objects to Haslanger’s ameliorative account of gender on the
grounds that its use by feminists would only confuse ordinary speakers. But this
assumes a strict separation between the language use of “feminists” and “ordinary
speakers,”¹7 as if either of these groups was not internally diverse regarding its
language and concept use. These groups are also overlapping; and in our view, it is
not implausible that a person can use our second or third meaning of        (which
takes a first-person view and is of benefit to oneself), while also employing the first
meaning of        (which partially takes a third-person view and is most fruitful in
thinking about the situation of various persons of one’s gender), at least in other
contexts. Generally, common language already permits a good deal of flexibility,
where a word is used with somewhat varying meanings, which need not conflict in
the aspects relevant to a communicative situation, or where the context disambiguates
sufficiently to not hinder discourse.
To be sure, there are drawbacks with expressing several meanings by means of an
established term, given that associations tied to one (entrenched) meaning may carry
over to another meaning (McPherson and Plunkett, Chapter 14, this volume). Yet a
more compelling reason than confusion across speakers is political consequences.
Despite our resolute pluralism on the level of concepts, we acknowledge that on the
terminological level one meaning of ‘gender’ may often have to prevail in public
discourse (and different words may have to be found for the other meanings).
Among the three purposes that concepts of        may serve, currently the
politically most consequential agenda is to ensure legal rights and social recognition,
as shown by efforts to publicly misgender trans persons, which would have major
practical consequences not only in the case of successful legal measures to deny
access to public facilities such as bathrooms. Thus, to the extent to which existing
terms such as ‘gender’ and ‘woman’ need to be associated with a prioritized meaning,
it would be our second concept of        as one’s self-identification with a gender
category.
¹7 “Quite simply, if feminists appropriated Haslanger’s gender terms, this would create linguistic
confusion between them and ordinary speakers . . . achieving this task would be hugely difficult if feminists
appropriated Haslanger’s gender terminology because it complicates communication between them and
ordinary language users” (Mikkola 2009: 569).
 
                                    
 
 
  121
Note that even such a more monistic use of the term ‘gender’ diverges from how
some persons ordinarily use the term—our self-identification concept of       
definitely is not about someone’s biological sex at birth. Generally, the point of
conceptual engineering and conceptual ethics is to improve some concepts that are
currently used. Not only does this make it unavoidable that a term is used with its
current meaning while some (also) use it with a revised meaning, but the advocacy
for a politically more appropriate meaning of a traditional term will always generate
social friction. The widespread use of such a revised meaning has to be seen as a
political ideal, which can only be achieved by a gradual, arduous process.

122
123
124
   125
Never Say ‘Never Say “Never’’’ 
Alexis Burgess
We theorize with the concepts we have, not the ones we hope to have eventually, at
some ideal limit of inquiry. That’s true even when it comes to theorizing about our
current concepts. Such theorizing can therefore be reflexive, blending use and
mention. To take one simple case: a standard semantics for conjunction just uses
conjunction itself. More to the point of the present volume, this sort of reflexivity
shows up in normative theorizing about concepts too. For instance, we’ll use logical
concepts to reason about which logical concepts we ought to be using.
Now suppose you and I disagree about whether or not we ought to use some
particular concept C, and we want to start arguing about it. A question of method
arises. Should we suspend use of C for the duration of our debate ¹ After all, it would
seem hypocritical of me to use C in the course of arguing that we shouldn’t use
C. And it seems circular or question-begging for you to use C in arguing that we can
permissibly use C (or that we must). So perhaps we should just agree at the outset to
avoid using C. But then again, that policy might sound like a significant concession to
me, the enemy of C. What’s more, whether or not this suspension policy would be
prejudicial, it might turn out to be quite impracticable, if C is somehow central to our
conceptual schemes; as concepts of philosophical interest tend to be. There are no
Archimedean points in conceptual ethics. So what exactly are the rules of engagement
here 
This short chapter tries to make some headway on the methodology of conceptual
ethics by offering a qualified defense of “hypocrisy”.²
First some terminology. By an argument in conceptual ethics, I’ll mean an
argument in the strict formal sense, whose conclusion concerns whether or not we
should use some concept C. This is already a stipulative restriction in scope. I’m
ignoring evaluative conclusions, for example, to focus exclusively on deontic modals.
And I’m not going to say much about arguments that target multiple concepts at
once (e.g., all vague concepts, inconsistent concepts, or concepts of race and gender).
My spotlight is meant to be flexible in other ways, however. “We” whose use of C is
at issue could be anyone you please: we folk, we philosophers, we atheists. “Should”
¹ Presumably we’ll have to refer to C somehow, or at least quantify over it; but the question is about use,
not mention.’
² For more on the mirror-image issue of circularity, see my (2013).
 
 
 
  126
can also be glossed in different ways: morally, prudentially, rationally; all-thingsconsidered;
or just pro tanto. And note that conclusions of this basic form can be
combined to yield more nuanced views in conceptual ethics. Revisionism about C, for
example, might be taken to decompose into a pair of views: that we should not use
C (i.e., eliminativism) but should use C*; where C and C* stand in some suitable
similarity relation.³
I’ll call an argument that we should not use C an “anti-C” argument, and an
argument that we can or should use C a “pro-C” argument.4 So a “circular” argument
in conceptual ethics is a pro-C argument that uses C. And a “hypocritical” argument in
conceptual ethics is an anti-C argument that uses C.5 When I say that an argument
“uses” a concept C, I basically mean that a phrase whose content involves C appears in
some line of the argument.
Now, actual anti-C arguments in this area rarely have conclusions as blunt as: one
shouldn’t use C, period. People rather tend to argue for parameterized conclusions,
like: one shouldn’t use C for these sorts of purposes, or in those kinds of contexts.
Elsewhere, David Plunkett and I have spilled some ink on the range of relevant
parameters in conceptual ethics.6 Here I just want to think schematically. To be more
realistic, we’ll want to say that anti-C arguments end in the verdict that we shouldn’t
go in for a certain (probably improper) subset of possible uses of C. Or put another
way: that we shouldn’t use C is settings of type S.7 To be explicit, call these anti-C/S
arguments. This adjustment mandates a corresponding change to our definition of
hypocrisy. The anti-C/S arguments of interest are just those that make use of C in
what amounts to a setting of type S. (But I’ll suppress this complication for readability
when it’s not relevant.)
So, should we abjure hypocritical arguments in conceptual ethics  Or more
positively, is it permissible to argue hypocritically 
A number of my informants have reported that hypocrisy doesn’t feel inherently
problematic to them. Sure, there may be something odd about initiating a debate in
conceptual ethics with a hypocritical argument. But if your interlocutor is already on
record as endorsing the use of some concept C, then using C yourself in the course of
trying to persuade her otherwise just feels like “addressing one’s opponent on her
³ To get closer to the conventional understanding of revisionism, one might add that C is already in
circulation, while C* is not.’
4 For symmetry, one could also call arguments that we can permissibly refrain from using C “anti-C”.
But I won’t be concerned with this broader class of conclusions. Eliminativism and revisionism, which lie at
the heart of conceptual ethics, both involve the stronger claim that we should not use C. And there’s
nothing prima facie hypocritical or problematic about using C to argue that we can permissibly refrain
from using C.
5 Interestingly, perhaps, there’s no analogue of hypocrisy in conceptual analysis. A circular analysis uses
C to specify the content of C itself. A circular ethics uses C to argue in favor of using C. A hypocritical ethics
uses C to argue against using C. But there’s nothing “hypocritical” about using C to specify the content of
some other concept, like C’s complement, or an antonym. If anything, that would just be another kind of
circularity.
6 Burgess and Plunkett (2013).
7 I like the word ‘setting’ because it’s relatively free of other theoretical associations. I also like that it can
be read as both environment/context and “value of a variable”. I think I can enjoy those resonances
simultaneously without committing any fallacies of equivocation.
 
                  
 
 
  127
own terms”. Cast in this dialectical light, hypocrisy actually looks a lot like good oldfashioned
reductio.8 Witness where the presumption that it’s kosher to use C leads us:
to the conclusion that it’s not!
Of course, if and when you persuade your opponent that we shouldn’t use C, via
some hypocritical argument, she may well reflect on her route to that conclusion,
note that it used C, and hence retrospectively disavow the argument.  But that’s just
“kicking away a ladder” once it’s been climbed. No problem there, right 
The problem with this kind of ladder-kicking is what Gilbert Harman (1986: 39)
has called the principle of positive undermining. His thought is basically that a
subject should stop believing P once she realizes that her basis for that belief isn’t
actually any good. And unless your opponent above is totally daft, she’ll see that the
only reason she eventually came around to your anti-C position (P) was a hypocritical
argument that she’s now disowned. So, according to Harman’s principle, she
should now stop believing that we shouldn’t use C. Once she kicks away the
hypocritical ladder, the rational thing to do is jump back down off the roof.¹°
Now, I don’t take this line of thought to show that there is definitely something
wrong with hypocritical arguments. After all, I aim to defend hypocrisy in the end.
But I do take the Harman-inspired point to undermine (or at least problematize) the
idea that hypocrisy is innocuous just because of its resemblance to reductio.¹¹ And
we’ll soon see a simple, direct argument against hypocrisy, which will take some time
to evaluate.
First, though, I want to spend a moment addressing the significance of getting
clearer on the status of hypocrisy. Officially, a hypocritical argument is an anti-C/S
argument that uses C in a setting of type S. How often do such arguments actually
crop up in conceptual ethics  And how hard is it to reformulate them without
hypocrisy when they do arise  If it’s not often, or not hard, then maybe we shouldn’t
8 It’s not really reductio, though. I’m actually not sure how to describe the logical or formal relationship
between the supposition that one can permissibly use C (which merely mentions C) and the first
subsequent step of the argument that actually uses C.
  Unless the conclusion of the argument is that we shouldn’t use C outside the scope of a supposition
(or some such setting S), since we’re assuming the argument only uses C within the scope of a supposition.
But if this conclusion was derived by discharging a supposition reduced to absurdity, the supposition must
have been that it’s permissible to use C outside the scope of a supposition. But this supposition would not
have warranted subsequent use of C within its scope.’
¹° To make matters more complicated, though: once your opponent has dropped the anti-C view, her
only reason for resisting your hypocritical argument is gone! So she should presumably climb the ladder
once again. She could keep going around and around in this way indefinitely. But this possibility doesn’t
make hypocritical arguments look particularly attractive.’
¹¹ Here’s a reply due to David Taylor. Nevermind whether hypocritical arguments are themselves
acceptable. The mere existence of an otherwise compelling hypocritical argument immediately provides
for a compelling, non-hypocritical, anti-C argument, along the following lines. Initially adopting the pro-C
position would lead to a kind of cognitive instability (in light of the previous note), where we’re constantly
flip-flopping between accepting and rejecting the use of C. This situation is rationally untenable, so we can
only embrace the anti-C alternative. (Compare my own Reply to the Objection at the very end of the
present chapter.) I’m not sure whether to accept this friendly suggestion, however. For the rational force of
Taylor’s non-hypocritical argument-form seems to hinge on the status of the associated hypocritical
argument. If hypocrisy is a disqualifying vice, friends of C can reasonably refuse the first flip-flop. So
there may be no avoiding a direct confrontation with the issue of the chapter: whether hypocrisy itself is
somehow problematic.
 
          ‘          “     ” ’     
 
 
  128
invest too much energy in trying to understand or evaluate hypocrisy. These two
issues are closely related. How “hard” it is to transform a hypocritical argument into a
non-hypocritical argument depends in large part on how densely packed the field of
possible anti-C/S arguments is with hypocritical ones. So let me first speak to this
basic statistical issue. And let me bracket setting-sensitivity to begin with.
Conceptual ethics is a part of philosophy that’s preoccupied with concepts. The
concepts that interest philosophers tend to be “central” to our ordinary conceptual
schemes, in the sense that they’re implicated in the analysis of a whole host of other
concepts. I’m thinking of things like modal concepts (necessary, contingent), logical
concepts (exists, identical), normative concepts (should, right), epistemic concepts
(know, rational), and so on.¹² Since we still do philosophy in something resembling
natural language, central concepts like these will inevitably turn up in any sustained
effort to specify the contents of the bits of language use that make up philosophical
discourse. Discourse in conceptual ethics is no exception. Any given anti-C argument
therefore runs a significant risk of deploying a concept whose analysis involves
C itself. In a generous sense of “use”—where using the concept vixen, for example,
involves using the concept fox—such an argument would count as hypocritical.¹³
To get a feel for the size of this risk, let’s play with some numbers. Let’s say there
are 50 central concepts of philosophical interest. And let’s say the average philosophical
argument (in conceptual ethics) makes overt, explicit use of 30 different
concepts (central or otherwise). And let’s say the average conceptual analysis involves
4 central concepts. Of the (304 =) 120 token concepts implicated in the average
argument, at least 70 have to be redundant (given that there are only 50 central
concepts). Let’s say as many as 100 are redundant, so that the average non-redundant
concept shows up 6 times in the argument. Then the chance of hypocrisy would be
(20/50 =) 40%. That’s pretty high. If there were something terribly wrong with
hypocritical arguments, this level of risk might be unacceptable.
Suppose you found yourself arguing hypocritically by accident. How easy would it
be to rectify the mistake, without compromising the essential upshot of the argument
you were trying to make  I doubt there is any general recipe for converting hypocritical
arguments into equi-plausible, non-hypocritical arguments. And case-by-case
conversion won’t be as simple as paraphrasing away a few offending words. The
“paradox” of analysis points up just how hard it is to know in advance which
concepts will be implicated in an adequate definition. Our best efforts at paraphrase
could easily end up introducing new dimensions of hypocrisy, or simply preserving
old ones.
¹² Some concepts of interest to actual conceptual ethicists probably won’t show up in the analysis of any
concepts explicitly used by those ethicists. I’m thinking of slurs, for example, or racial concepts. These are
not central to our conceptual schemes in the relevant sense. So if your interest in this book stems mostly
from your interest in concepts like those, this chapter may not be for you.
¹³ It doesn’t matter if this sense of “use” feels artificial. What’s relevant is whether there’s anything
intuitively objectionable about using the concept vixen to argue that we shouldn’t use the concept fox. Or to
take a less frivolous example: whether there’s anything suspicious about using the concept of reliability to
argue that we shouldn’t use the concept of truth (on the supposition that reliability is properly defined in
terms of truth). These cases doesn’t feel much better to me than overt, word-for-word hypocrisy.

 
 
  129
Doesn’t this whole situation look much less dire, though, once we acknowledge the
setting-sensitivity of real-life arguments in conceptual ethics  Won’t the typical
hypocritical argument just fall outside the scope of its own S  And even if not,
can’t we always just replace S with some S* that excludes the argument by fiat 
Not so fast. First of all, as a purely descriptive matter, the most common settings
you’ll find in real-life conceptual ethics are by far, “for ordinary practical purposes”
and “for serious theoretical purposes”. Philosophical arguments may fall outside the
scope of the former, but they certainly don’t escape the latter. Second, excluding an
argument from its own scope by fiat could be problematically ad hoc. If the modified
argument featuring S* seems plausible, that’s probably because it borrows luster from
some more natural, less gerrymandered argument. Take a toy example. Compare a
hypocritical argument that we shouldn’t use the notion of numerical identity “for
serious theoretical purposes” to a sanitized variant that self-consciously excludes
normative theorizing about that very concept. If the second argument is any good,
that’s probably due to its being a special case of the first.¹4
All of which is really just to say that it would certainly be nice if hypocrisy were
innocuous. Then we could go about our business in conceptual ethics without
constantly monitoring the concepts we use to mount our anti-C arguments. Unfortunately,
there is a simple line of reasoning to the effect that we should never accept
hypocritical arguments:
Argument X.¹5 For any concept C, any setting-type S, and any hypocritical, anti-C/S argument
H, either H is sound or it isn’t. If H isn’t sound, then we shouldn’t accept it. So suppose H is
sound (case two). Then its conclusion is true. Its conclusion is that we shouldn’t use C in
settings of type S. Since H is hypocritical, to accept H would be to use C in such a setting.¹6 So
we shouldn’t accept H. So, in either case, whether or not H is sound, we shouldn’t accept it.¹7
It might sound odd to counsel (in case two) against accepting a sound argument.
Soundness is usually what we tell our students to aspire to. But we all know that some
sound arguments are dialectically no good: the question-begging ones. Argument
X just goes to show that we should treat hypocrisy similarly.
This last observation raises a question of focus for us.¹8 When reflecting on
conceptual ethics, maybe we ought to be more interested in issues of soundness
and truth; less interested in issues of method or disputation. Metaphysics first,
epistemology later. To make the complaint vivid, consider a hypocritical one-liner
(where premise and conclusion collapse into a single claim):
(Z) We should not use ‘should’.¹ 
¹4 Here I take issue with Scharp (Chapter 19, this volume, Section 8) on defective concepts in conceptual
engineering.’
¹5 Interestingly, there doesn’t seem to be any analogous argument against circularity in conceptual
ethics.
¹6 More generally: to accept an argument that uses C is inter alia to use C yourself.
¹7 This might be a confusing way to state the conclusion, if ‘should’ means different things in case one
and case two. In case two, it means whatever ‘should’ means in the conclusion of H. In case one, it’s just
being used to track the sense(s) in which unsound arguments are verboden.
¹8 Thanks to Herman Cappelen for pressing me here, and inspiring the following digression.
¹  Or never say ‘never’. See Eklund (2015: section 5) on conceptual fixed points.
   
  130
If Z were true, that would be headline news. It wouldn’t matter much, by comparison,
whether we should nevertheless avoid accepting Z. So why have I been focusing on
the rules of engagement in conceptual ethics rather than the facts on the ground 
Not for any good reason, really. I think these alethic questions are interesting too.
But hypocritical one-liners are few and far between in conceptual ethics. (Because
there are only so many concepts involved in articulating any anti-C view.) And when
it comes to full-blown arguments, my hunch is that hypocrisy should be no obstacle
to validity. Soundness is a further question. I can imagine someone thinking that
hypocritical arguments can’t possibly be sound (and that one-liners can’t possibly be
true). But I have no firm view. And however these alethic issues shake out, I do think
it’s worth wondering whether there’s something independently, dialectically wrong
with hypocrisy, in the same vein as begging the question. Who knows, though, what
order we should take all this in. I’m focusing on method mainly because I have
something to say about it. Here, then, is the idea that precipitated the present chapter.
Notice that X isn’t just an argument about conceptual ethics, it’s actually a contribution
to conceptual ethics. Its conclusion says that we shouldn’t accept hypocritical
arguments. But accepting an argument involves using the concepts featured therein.
So X concerns a normative question about concept use. To be more exact, we could
regiment its conclusion as a prohibition against using any concept C in a certain type
of setting: hypocritical arguments. (Or more narrowly: arguments that are hypocritical
with respect to C specifically; the choice won’t matter.) Now, the observation that
X itself amounts to an argument in conceptual ethics proper doesn’t immediately
impugn X. But it does raise an interesting question.
Is X hypocritical  Well, we’ve only defined hypocrisy for arguments in conceptual
ethics whose conclusions target individual concepts. So consider an argument generated
from X by universal instantiation on C. And let’s pick a concept explicitly
used in X, like soundness, acceptance, disjunction, or even hypocrisy itself.
The conclusion of this new argument would therefore be that we shouldn’t use the
concept of (e.g.) acceptance to mount hypocritical arguments. Call the new argument
A, for acceptance:
Argument A. For any setting-type S, and any hypocritical, anti-acceptance/S argument H,
either H is sound or it isn’t. If H isn’t sound, then we shouldn’t accept it. So suppose H is sound
(case two). Then its conclusion is true. Its conclusion is that we shouldn’t use acceptance in
settings of type S. Since H is hypocritical, to accept H would be to use acceptance in such a
setting. So we shouldn’t accept H. So, in either case, whether or not H is sound, we shouldn’t
accept it. In other words: we shouldn’t use acceptance in H-type settings.
If there were something problematic about A, then presumably X would inherit the
problem.²° So, is A hypocritical  Like X, it uses the concept of acceptance. And unlike
X, its conclusion does specifically say that we shouldn’t use that very concept. But
A only proscribes the use of that concept in settings of a certain type: hypocritical,
²° Even if other instances of X, generated by instantiating C with other concepts, aren’t problematic.
After all, to endorse X in full generality is effectively to endorse each and every one of its instances. We
could restrict the initial quantifier over C in X just to concepts that aren’t used in X itself. But then we’d
have to confront a version of the borrowed luster issue raised earlier.
 
                  
 
 
  131
anti-acceptance arguments. As we’ve just said, A is an anti-acceptance argument. So,
given the definition of hypocrisy, the only thing left for us to check in order to
determine whether A is hypocritical is therefore . . . whether A is hypocritical! If it is,
it is; and if it isn’t, it isn’t.
This predicament is strikingly similar to the situation with truth-teller sentences
in the literature on the semantic paradoxes, like “This sentence is true”. As far as the
T-scheme is concerned, all we can say is that the truth-teller is true if it’s true; not if
it’s not. And it’s not at all clear where else to look for guidance as to the sentence’s
truth-value. Similarly, it’s unclear what might settle the status of A if not the
definition of hypocrisy (together with A’s intrinsic features).
What follows from all this  At the very least, I think we can conclude that there is
something odd and potentially problematic about A, and therefore X. Since X is the
only argument we have managed to marshal against hypocrisy, this conclusion
strikes me as a significant, if vague, defensive result. I haven’t offered a positive
argument that hypocrisy is kosher. (Recall that I didn’t endorse the argument that
assimilates hypocritical reasoning to reductio.) I won’t say that hypocrisy is innocent
until proven guilty. But I will stop investing time trying to avoid hypocrisy in
conceptual ethics until someone comes up with a solid reason.
Objection. The worst-case scenario you painted above was that A might be
hypocritical. But you don’t think there’s anything wrong with hypocrisy. So you
have no reason to resist A, and therefore no reason to resist X.
Reply. But if we accept X, then we will think there’s something wrong with
hypocrisy. So accepting X is unstable. Moreover, you’ve misdescribed the worstcase
scenario. The worry was rather that it’s somehow unsettled or indeterminate
whether A is hypocritical. Whatever you make of (determinate) hypocrisy, this
liminal status is just weird.
Conclusion. We should not yet conclude that we should not argue hypocritically
when we argue about which concepts we should use.

 132
7
Conceptual Engineering
The Master Argument
Herman Cappelen
I call the activity of assessing and developing improvements of our representational
devices ‘conceptual engineering’.¹ The aim of this chapter is to present an argument
for why conceptual engineering is important for all parts of philosophy (and, more
generally, all inquiry). Section I of the chapter provides some background and defines
key terms. Section II presents the argument. Section III responds to seven objections.
The replies also serve to develop the argument and clarify what conceptual engineering
is.
I. Background and Explanation of Central Terms
If we use ‘conceptual engineering’ as I suggested above, that is, to mean the project of
assessing and developing improvements of our representational devices, then if you
think ‘concepts’ are the core representational devices, conceptual engineering
amounts to the following: It is the project of assessing and then ameliorating our
concepts.² For example:
• An epistemological conceptual engineer will, in an ameliorative spirit, assess
epistemic concepts.
• A conceptual engineer in moral philosophy will, in an ameliorative spirit, assess
moral concepts.
• A metaphysical ameliorator will, in an ameliorative spirit, assess metaphysical
concepts.
• A semantic ameliorator will, in an ameliorative spirit, assess semantic concepts.
This normative project contrasts with a descriptive one. The descriptivist aims to
describe the concepts we have—to describe our epistemic, moral, metaphysical,
semantic, and so on, concepts. One important strand in the history of philosophy
¹ It can also include the activity of trying to implement the proposed improvements (for more on this,
see Cappelen and Plunkett’s Introduction to this volume).
² In Cappelen (2018), I end up not describing conceptual engineering in this way, but the argument in
this chapter can be presented independently of those reservations.
 
 133
is a battle (or tension or at least division³) between Descriptivists and Revisionists.
The distinction will not be simple or clear-cut and the battle lines have been drawn in
different ways in different time periods. But in each time period and in all parts of
philosophy, we find these two fundamentally conflicting attitudes or goals. For some,
success is measured by a true description of, for example, what knowledge, belief,
morality, representation, justice, or beauty is. For others, the aim is figuring out how
we improve on what we have: how can we improve on (our concepts of) knowledge,
justice, belief, beauty, etc.? Those with the former aim tend to find the latter
unintelligible (or naive) and those with the latter aim tend to find the former
complacent, uninspired, and lazy.
Nietzsche is perhaps the paradigm of a philosopher advocating what he calls
‘absolute skepticism’ towards our inherited concepts. In The Will to Power, he writes:
Philosophers . . . have trusted in concepts as completely as they have mistrusted the senses: they
have not stopped to consider that concepts and words are our inheritance from ages in which
thinking was very modest and unclear . . . .What dawns on philosophers last of all: they must no
longer accept concepts as a gift, nor merely purify and polish them, but first make and create
them, present them and make them convincing. Hitherto one has generally trusted one’s
concepts as if they were a wonderful dowry from some sort of wonderland: but they are,
after all, the inheritance from our most remote, most foolish as well as most intelligent
ancestors. . . . What is needed above all is an absolute skepticism toward all inherited concepts
(Nietzsche 1901/1968: section 409)
Strawson thought about the history of philosophy in part as a battle between
revisionists, like Nietzsche, and what he called descriptivists. At the beginning of
Individuals he distinguishes between descriptive and revisionary metaphysics:
Descriptive metaphysics is content to describe the actual structure of our thought about the
world, revisionary metaphysics is concerned to produce a better structure. (1959: 9)
One of his characterizations of the revisionists’ objection to descriptivists is acute.
He imagines the revisionist insisting that metaphysics is
. . . essentially an instrument of conceptual change, a means of furthering or registering new
directions or styles of thought. (1959: 10)
In that brief introduction Strawson also gestures at a way of writing a history of
philosophy based on the distinction between descriptivists and revisionists. He says
[p]erhaps no actual metaphysician has ever been, both in intention and effect, wholly the one
thing or the other. But we can distinguish broadly: Descartes, Leibniz, Berkeley are revisionary,
Aristotle and Kant descriptive. Hume, the ironist of philosophy, is more difficult to place.
He appears now under one aspect, now under another. (1959: 9)
This contrast is salient in many philosophical domains today. There are lively
revisionist projects in moral philosophy, theories of truth and logic, feminist and
³ How best to describe it is discussed further in connection with Objection (7) below.
 
 134
race theory, and so on.4 At the same time, there are descriptive projects dominating
large swaths of philosophy. The paradigm might be epistemologists’ endless efforts to
correctly describe what the English word ‘knows’ means.5 The same kind of descriptivist
aim is found throughout philosophy: just think of the obsession within the
philosophy of language with the minutiae of natural language and its semantics (e.g.,
the now-over-a-century-long debate about how the word ‘the’ works in English, or
the flurry of work on the English word ‘if ’), or efforts to describe our concepts of
‘freedom’, or ‘self ’, or ‘object’. These are more often than not pursued as purely
descriptive enterprises. Success is measured by descriptive adequacy—not by answering
the question what should those words mean? and what should the relevant
concepts be?6
II. The Master Argument
The argument I’ll be defending in what follows—‘The Master Argument’—is in no
way original to me. It is a line of thought that can be seen as motivating many
revisionist projects.7 Nonetheless, the argument in full generality is often left implicit.
The aim in what follows is to articulate the most general (not domain specific)
version of the argument and then consider a range of objections to it.
The Master Argument:
1. If W is a word8 that has a meaning M, then there are many similar meanings,
M1,M2, . . . ,Mn, W could have.
2. We have no good reason to think that the meaning thatWended up with is the
best meaningWcould have: there will typically be indefinitely many alternative
meanings that would be better meanings for W.
3. When we speak, think, and theorize it’s important to make sure our words have
as good meanings as possible.?
4. As a corollary: when doing philosophy, we should try to find good meanings for
core philosophical terms and they will typically not be the meanings those
words as a matter of fact have.
4 The literature is large here. A representative selection is: Railton (1989, 1993) for moral philosophy;
Scharp (2013) and Eklund (2014) for truth and logic; and Haslanger (2012) and Appiah (1992) for the
philosophies of gender and race. See my Fixing Language (2018: chapter 2, section 1), for a more
complete list.
5 What Robert Pasnau laments, in his 2013, as the degeneration of epistemology into lexicography.
6 For a brief history of the tension between revisionist and descriptivists in twentieth-century philosophy,
see Cappelen 2018: chapter 2.
7 See, for example, Chalmers 2011 and Eklund 2014, and the work in general of David Plunkett and
Timothy Sundell (2013), and of Haslanger (many of the papers collected in her 2012).
8 In this chapter I don’t individuate words semantically. If you like to use the word ‘word’ so that it
denotes a lexical item that has its meaning essentially, then you can translate from your way of speaking to
mine by substituting ‘lexical item’ for ‘word’ in this chapter. The metaphysics of words is difficult and
relevant, but not addressed in this chapter (see Kaplan 1990 and Cappelen 1999 for some discussion).
? Or, as David Plunkett suggested to me, maybe ‘good enough meanings’ is good enough. Maybe aiming
for ‘best possible’ is too ambitious. I’m open-minded on this issue. This is one of several places where one
can articulate related versions of the Master Argument.
 
 
 135
5. So no matter what topic a philosopher is concerned with, they should assess
and ameliorate the meanings of central terms¹°.
This is a controversial argument that builds in many assumptions. I take the
project of outlining a general theory of conceptual engineering to be, in large part,
the project of defending this kind of argument. In contrast, most work done on
conceptual engineering is domain-specific and done by those working in those
domains. For example, you might be interested in questions such as:
• What should our moral concepts be like?
• What should our gender and race concepts be like?
• What should our concepts of, say, civilian or person or family or terrorist or
truth be?
Those specific topics derive their significance from the importance of the specific
subject matters addressed. The Master Argument, on the other hand, isn’t domainspecific.
This, I take it, shows that there is a general research project here, that is of
interest independently of the case studies.
III. Replies to Seven Objections
In what follows I address seven related objections to the Master Argument:
• Objection (1): Why think that if a word, W, has a meaning M, then there are
many similar meanings W could have?
• Objection (2): In what sense can one meaning be better than another?
• Objection (3): Why not think the meanings words have are the best they can be
(or at least very, very good)?
• Objection (4): If we change the meaning of an expression, won’t that result in
massive verbal disputes and changes of topic?
• Objection (5): Aren’t meaning assignments normatively neutral, as long as each
thing worth meaning is meant by some word or other? Some things are worth
meaning, but why does it matter whether a given word means one of those
things or something else?
• Objection (6): Why think the importance of the revisionist project undermines
the importance of the descriptive project? Why think there’s a tension between
the two approaches? Aren’t they complementary?
• Objection (7): If we are to engage in conceptual engineering, don’t we have to
assume that meaning assignments are within our control? If they are out of our
control, how can we meaningfully engage in conceptual engineering?
In answering these objections, I hope to (a), clarify the nature of conceptual
engineering, and (b), outline the central challenges for conceptual engineering as a
field.
¹° As will become clear below, amelioration sometimes involves improving the meaning while keeping
the lexical item fixed, and sometimes it involves the introduction of a new lexical item with an improved
meaning.
 
 136
Objection (1): Why Think that if a Word, W, Has a Meaning M,
Then There Are Many Similar Meanings W Could Have?
I respond to this objection in two steps: First, I motivate the idea of similar meanings,
and then the idea that W could have one of these similar meanings.
On the idea of similar meanings: There’s little agreement on what meanings are
and the Master Argument is neutral on that foundational issue. However, it’s hard
to think of any account of what meanings are that’s incompatible with this claim.
A way to illustrate this is to think, in common with many philosophers, of
meanings as at least intensions, that is, functions from points of evaluation to
extensions.¹¹ So ‘freedom’, ‘knows’, ‘justice’, ‘belief ’, and all other expressions are
associated with an intension and this intension is a function that gives a value (an
extension) for each point of evaluation. Now, just change the function a little bit
and you have a similar but different meaning (if meanings either are or determine
intensions). Suppose, for example, ‘knows’ picks out a relation between an agent
and a content. The literature on the definition of ‘knows’ has given us literally
hundreds of proposals for intensions of ‘knows’ that are very similar—they differ a
tiny bit on how to deal with Gettier cases or lottery cases or some other weird
scenarios, but are otherwise very similar. ‘Knows’ presumably picks out one of
these functions, but there are very many similar ones.
On the idea that words can change from one meaning to another one: So far so
good, but why think that once a meaning has been fixed, it is changeable? Why not
think that meaning assignments get fixed and then are stuck eternally? First-pass
answer: a word, say ‘marriage’ could mean anything. We could, right now, use it to
mean what ‘camel’ or ‘soup’ does. There’s nothing in that sign that makes those
meaning assignments impossible. If it’s possible, now, for ‘marriage’ to mean camel,
then it could also mean one of the meanings that are similar to its current meaning.
In reply to this one might think that conceptual engineering is a matter of
implementing gradual changes, not the kind of change exemplified by the possibility
of assigning camel as the meaning of ‘marriage’. However, we know that
there can be such gradual changes and that they happen constantly. Historical or
diachronic linguistics is a field devoted entirely to the study of various forms of
syntactic and semantic changes over time. These fields are in part the study of how
meanings of words evolve gradually (from one meaning to a similar one) over
time. The claim that gradual semantic change is impossible is refuted by the
findings of these well-established research fields.
Two issues raised by this reply will be addressed later:
a) I just argued that meaning adjustment is possible. I didn’t say that it was easy or
within our control. I return to the question of how we can (or cannot) be in
control of meaning change in reply to Objection (7) below.
¹¹ For the purposes of this chapter, I will be neutral on what points of evaluation are—they might be
worlds, world/time pairs or something more complicated. I don’t need to take a stand on those issues in
this chapter (though I do have views, for which, see Cappelen and Hawthorne 2009).

 137
b) I’ve focused on cases where we want to improve the meaning of a particular
lexical item. In some cases, we don’t care about the lexical item in question, but
rather want to introduce a new lexical item for the improved or alternative
meaning. There’s a range of options here and they’re discussed in reply to
Objection (5) below.
Objection (2): In What Sense Can One Meaning Be Better Than Another?
There’s an extensive philosophical tradition for thinking that the concepts or meanings
our words express can be defective and can be improved along various dimensions, and
so for thinking that some meanings can be better than others. This view can be found
throughout the history of philosophy, but in what follows I’ll focus on some versions
found in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Carnap’s idea that intellectual work
typically involves explication is a paradigm. The core thought was that the meanings
we assigned to our words could be defective and for Carnap the central defects were
indeterminacy and vagueness. Explication was a process of improvement. For Carnap,
improvements were measured relativized to purposes. Here is how Anil Gupta explains
the difference between an absolute and purpose-relative improvement:
An explication aims to respect some central uses of a term but is stipulative on others.
The explication may be offered as an absolute improvement of an existing, imperfect concept.
Or, it may be offered as a ‘good thing to mean’ by the term in a specific context for a particular
purpose. (Gupta 2015: section 1.5)
I’d like to focus on the idea that an explication is a ‘good thing to mean’ by the term in
a specific context for a particular purpose. Here is an illustration from Gupta:
The truth-functional conditional provides another illustration of explication. This conditional
differs from the ordinary conditional in some essential respects. Nevertheless, the truthfunctional
conditional can be put forward as an explication of the ordinary conditional for
certain purposes in certain contexts. Whether the proposal is adequate depends crucially on the
purposes and contexts in question. That the two conditionals differ in important, even
essential, respects does not automatically disqualify the proposal. (Gupta 2015: section 1.5)
Much the same idea of explication can be found in Quine’s Word and Object (Quine
1960), where Quine writes about explication:
We do not claim synonymy. We do not claim to make clear and explicit what the users of the
unclear expression had unconsciously in mind all along. We do not expose hidden meanings,
as the words ‘analysis’ and ‘explication’ would suggest; we supply lacks. We fix on the particular
functions of the unclear expression that make it worth troubling about, and then devise a
substitute, clear and couched in terms to our liking, that fills those functions. Beyond those
conditions of partial agreement, dictated by our interests and purposes, any traits of the
explicans come under the head of “don’t-cares” (§38). Under this head we are free to allow
the explicans. (Quine 1960: 2589)
On this more general understanding of explication, there is no unique correct
explication of any term, the improvement is relative to contextually specific purposes.
With that in mind, there is no reason why there should be a fixed set of theoretical
 
 138
virtues that are used to measure improvement. In certain contexts, non-theoretical
virtues/advantages could make a big difference.
So understood, much work in social and political philosophy can be seen as a
continuation of Carnap’s proposal. Take, for example, Sally Haslanger’s work on
gender and race concepts. An important element of that work is a proposal for how
gender and race terms can be ameliorated, that is, can be given better meanings.
The dimensions of assessment that she has in mind are different from Carnap’s, but
they are part of the same general project: of improving our concept along many and
diverse dimensions.
A great deal of philosophy engages in this form of amelioration, often without
making a big deal out of it. Consider, for example, Clark and Chalmers’ paper
‘The Extended Mind’ (1998). Clark and Chalmers propose, among other things,
that ‘A believes that p’ be used in a way that makes it true even when p is a
proposition that A has access to only with the assistance of various ‘external’ devices
(Clark and Chalmers 1998). In connection with that proposal, they consider various
objections of the form: Well, that’s just not how we use ‘belief ’ in English. In response
they say:
We do not intend to debate what is standard usage; our broader point is that the notion of
belief ought to be used so that Otto qualifies as having the belief in question. In all important
respects, Otto’s case is similar to a standard case of (non-occurrent) belief [ . . . ] By using the
‘belief ’ notion in a wider way, it picks out something more akin to a natural kind. The notion
becomes deeper and more unified, and is more useful in explanation.
(Clark and Chalmers 1998: 14)
Clark and Chalmers’ goal is not primarily to describe our current concept of
belief—they want to revise our concept. Note two particularly important features of
the proposal. (i) Their revision changes both the extension and the intension of the
concept of ‘belief ’. (ii) They briefly provide a justification for the revision: it is, they
say, more useful in explanations. Their new revised concept is also ‘deeper’ and ‘more
unified’. So our current notion is defective, as it is not sufficiently unified, not
sufficiently deep, and not sufficiently useful in explanations. These kind of ameliorative
moves are made in all parts of philosophy. For some salient recent examples
think of Haslanger’s work on race and gender concepts, Eklund and Scharp on truth,
and Railton’s proposed revision of core moral terms (see footnote 4 for references).
For a wide range of illustrations, see Plunkett and Sundell (MS); Ludlow (2014); and
Cappelen (2018: chapter 2). Beyond philosophy it’s easy to find lively debates about
(what at least looks like) meaning assignments. Consider discussions about what
should be in the extension of ‘torture’, or ‘person’, or ‘marriage’, or ‘rape’. These are
not plausibly construed simply as efforts to find a descriptively adequate account of
what these words actually mean. Imagine if a semantically omniscient god told us
that ‘torture’ has a semantic value that doesn’t include waterboarding. That’s
extremely unlikely to stop the debate over whether waterboarding is torture. One
way to explain, that is, to construe it as a debate over whether ‘torture’ should have a
meaning that makes it include waterboarding in its extension.
So far, I’ve simply pointed out that there are people who think meanings can be
improved. It goes beyond the scope of this chapter to assess each of these proposals.
 
 139
Suffice it to say that if you find one or more of those views plausible, you should be on
board with a version of premise (2) in the Argument.
It is, however, worth considering the denial of the claim that meaning assignments
can be assessed. This is the view that there’s no normative dimension along which
one meaning for W can be better than an alternative meaning. More generally:
Complete Neutrality: Meaning assignments are always normatively neutral.
To assess Complete Neutrality, consider the fact that meaning assignments have a
huge influence on what we can think about and how we can think about those
features of the world that we can think about. Both of these have all kinds of effects
on humans, both inter- and intra-personally. To hold that those effects cannot be
assessed seems implausible for a range of simple reasons: If, for example, Fs are
important to a group of agents, then it’s good for them to be able to think about Fs
and not good if they can’t think about Fs. If, however, thinking, theorizing, or
discussing Fs is unfortunate for those agents, then nevertheless having an expression
that denotes Fs is worse than not having one.
Objection (3): Why Not Think the Meanings Words
Have Are the Best They Can Be (or Need to Be)?
I hope Objection (3) sounds silly: It’s implausible that a cultural artifact that’s
generated in a messy, largely incomprehensible way that’s outside our control¹²
should end up producing something we can’t improve on. Everything we humans
produce can be improved—why think meaning assignments are ideal (or good
enough) straight off? Even if there are degrees of appropriateness, it would be
amazing if we got exactly the right degree right off the bat.
A natural thought in this vicinity is nicely captured by Austin. In ‘A Plea for
Excuses’ Austin says that “ordinary language . . . embodies . . . the inherited experience
and acumen of many generations of men. . . . If a distinction works well for practical
purposes in ordinary life (no mean feat, for even ordinary life is full of hard cases),
then there is sure to be something in it, it will not mark nothing” (Austin 1956: 11).
Austin might be right: the carvings up that have survived over many generations are
likely to ‘mark something’. But note that even if this is true, we’re not even close to
the claim that there’s no room for improvement. The Austinian thought gives us
reason to think we’re not totally wasting our time thinking with, say, the predicates
we have, but in no way moves us towards the claim that they can’t or shouldn’t be
improved. This is of course recognized by Austin who goes on to say that ‘ . . . ordinary
language is not the last word: in principle it can everywhere be supplemented and
improved upon and superseded.’ (Austin 1956: 11). The challenge here is to recognize
when ordinary language is good enough and when it can be improved upon.
This is a deeply normative project, not primarily a descriptive one, and it is continuous
with the kind of engineering projects described above. In the passage from The
Will to Power, quoted above, Nietzsche points out that our concepts are ‘the
inheritance from our most remote, most foolish as well as most intelligent ancestors’.
¹² Or at least so I argue in reply to Objection (8) below.
 
 140
Given the impact of the most foolish, it would be naive in the extreme to trust our
conceptual dowry in any domain.
Austin connects the survival of what he calls ‘a distinction’ to the promotion of
certain purposes. Again, as Nietzsche points out, these purposes are typically remote
and often the purposes of fools. As purposes change (maybe because some of us
become less foolish) we need to adjust the way we carve things up. Sometimes this
will be the result of moral and political evolutions. In other cases, the changes are
driven by needs and purposes that result from technological changes. In yet other
cases, the changes are the result of theoretical developments. As purposes change,
meanings need to change as well. This is yet another reason to endorse an attitude
closer to Nietzsche than to Austin: continuous and radical scepticism towards
inherited concepts and distinctions.
Objection (4): If We Change the Meaning of an Expression, Won’t That Result
in Massive Verbal Disputes and a Change of Topic?
Many philosophers have had concerns roughly of the following form. Suppose ‘F’
means M. We then ameliorate and in so doing revise the meaning of ‘F’. The
following will be the result: Pre-ameliorators using ‘F’ will be talking about something
other than those using ‘F’ post-amelioration. The result of the amelioration will be a
change of topic. That, again, can lead to verbal disputes: The pre-ameliorator asserted
‘Fs are G’ and the post-ameliorators say ‘Fs are not G’. It looks like a disagreement,
but if there’s been a change in meaning of ‘F’, then there’s no disagreement.
Moreover, if people pre-amelioration had put massive effort into trying to answer
the question: ‘Are Fs G?’; it now looks like we’ve lost track of that question. The
question asked by post-ameliorators when they utter ‘Are Fs G?’ is a different
question.
Worries of this sort constantly come up in discussions of revisionary traditions in
philosophy. My favorite illustration is Strawson’s objection to Carnap’s account of
explication (in his 1963) but we find the same kinds of concerns in the work of, for
example, Haslanger and Railton.
This is a concern I take seriously and much of my (2018) Fixing Language is an
effort to respond to Objection (4). Here is a summary of the reply:
We know independently of considerations having to do with conceptual engineering
that speakers who use the same sentence, S, with different but relevantly
similar semantic contents, can use S to say the same thing. So suppose A and
B both utter S, but the semantic value of S differs a bit in their two utterances (say,
because they occupy slightly different contexts.) We can still, in many contexts,
report them by saying that they have both said that S. That’s to say, we can use S to
say what they have both said. So same-saying can be preserved across differences
in semantic content. I suggest we use that as a model for what happens when
meanings are ameliorated as described above. The result is a change in, at least,
extensions and intensions, but that’s consistent with a preservation of samesaying.
If it can preserve same-saying, there’s a sense in which they both talk
about the same subject matter. I call this a preservation of topics. So even though
the meaning of, say, ‘family’ can change over time, we can still say that there’s
 

 141
continuity of topic among those who use ‘family’: they are talking about families.
Evidence for this is that two speakers who utter ‘Families are G’, one preamelioration
and one post-amelioration, can both be described as having said
that families are G.
To endorse this you need to buy a collection of claims that that can be summarized as
follows:
• First, you have to accept that same-saying can be preserved despite semantic
differences. Same-saying data from speakers who use context sensitive terms is
an important source of evidence here. An adjective like ‘smart’, for example, will
fix a comparison class (or a cut off on a scale) in context. There can be two
utterances of ‘Jill is smart’ where the comparison class or cut off differs a bit (i.e.,
they have different semantic contents), but where it is true to say that both A and
B said that Jill is smart. So this is evidence that same-saying can be preserved
across semantic difference. I think it’s fair to say that there’s a broad consensus
about this and that it constitutes more or less common ground among many of
those who think about meaning and communication. (For more on this, see
Cappelen and Lepore 2005.)
• Second, you have to accept that this notion of same-saying across semantic
difference can be used to establish a notion of topics and topic-preservation that
covers what happens when we engage in conceptual engineering. Alternatively,
you could take ‘sameness of topic’ as a primitive and use it to explain why we
treat speakers as samesayers. Either way, I suggest we treat this cluster of
concepts as basic and not aim for a reduction. The core question, for a theory
of same-saying or topic-preservation, is what theoretical use they can be put to.
I explore these issues further in section III of my (2018) of Fixing Language and my
conjecture is that even those who oppose the Austerity Framework that I develop
there can endorse this part of it.
Objection (5): Aren’t Meaning Assignments Normatively Neutral, as Long
as Each Thing Worth Meaning is Meant by Some Word or Other?
Some things are worth meaning, but it doesn’t matter whether a given word means
one of those things or something else. Suppose we’ve established the meaning of a
word, W, is defective along some important dimension and we come up with an
ameliorative strategy. A natural question is: when implementing this strategy, why
keep using W? Since you’re introducing a new (allegedly improved) meaning,
why not use a new word to mark the change? This is an important question.¹³
In what follows, I’ll articulate it as a choice between Lexical Expansion and Lexical
Improvement:
¹³ This useful articulation of the objection is due to Alexis Burgess. A discussion with Cian Dorr also
helped me get a bit clearer on all of this. For a discussion of related issues and an opposing conclusion, see
Dever (Chapter 8, this volume).

 142
Lexical Expansion: Where a new meaning is introduced as the meaning of a new
expression.
Lexical Improvement: where a new meaning replaces the meaning of an already
‘in use’ lexical item has.
The objection say: We have no reason to prefer Improvement over Expansion. The
underlying thesis is Pro-Expansion:
Always-Expand: New meanings should always be attached to new lexical items.
One way to motivate Always-Expand is through thinking about a strategy involved in
what Chalmers (2011) calls ‘the subscript gambit’. According to Chalmers, most
philosophical concepts are surrounded by similar concepts which constitute clusters.
For example, there’s a bunch of concepts in the vicinity of the concept of freedom.
The English word ‘free’ might pick out one of those, but we should not think that the
concept our word happens to pick out is particularly interesting or useful. What we
should do instead is explore the entire conceptual neighbourhood, and then introduce
a range of new expressions. Chalmers tends to describe these using subscripts,
so we have ‘freedom1’, freedom2’, . . . , freedomn’.We should keep each of these in our
conceptual arsenal, so to speak. They can be useful for different purposes—and
having all of them lexicalized enables us to express a wider range of truths.
Chalmers thinks philosophers have spent too much time (thinking they are)
fighting over what freedom really is by asking the question “Which one of freedom1,
freedom2, . . . , freedomn is really freedom?” (although they wouldn’t phrase it that
way, of course). As he sees it, that’s a fight over what the semantic value of ‘freedom’
simplicter is, and that is an uninteresting question. Chalmers’s thought is similar to
the one in the Master Argument: The English word ‘free’ has ended up with a
particular semantic value, but it could easily have had any of a bunch of similar
meaning. That it ended up with the particular meaning it has is in part the result
of random and intellectually insignificant factors. Chalmers (2011) goes further.
He says that obsessing over what that semantic value is can only be motivated by a
‘fetishistic’ value system.
With that as a background, the motivation for Objection (5) and Always-Expand
should be clear: just as it would be irrational to care about which freedom-concept is
assigned to ‘freedom1’ and which to ‘freedom2’, it doesn’t matter which freedom
concept is assigned to ‘freedom’. What matters is that we articulate and lexicalize the
range of interesting concepts in this vicinity.
Before turning to my reply, a couple of initial remarks:
• First notice that a proponent of Always-Expand is deeply involved in the core
activities of conceptual engineering: Evaluating meanings and reflecting on
ameliorative strategies. She is not opposed to conceptual engineering, but is
making a particular proposal for how ameliorative strategies should be
implemented.
• Choice of lexical items is important. If Always-Expand is true, that’s a deep fact
about the practice of conceptual engineering. In other words, I don’t think this is
just a trivial issue about words, because issues about words are hardly ever
trivial.
 
 143
That said, I think Always-Expand is false: Sometimes it is important to preserve
the lexical item. Here are four considerations against Always-Expand:

The lexical item itself can have cognitive and non-cognitive effects on us that we want
to preserve. In my Fixing Language (2018: chapter 11), I call these ‘lexical effects.’
Here are some illustrations:
• Brand names: There is a reason why companies spend an enormous amount of
resources protecting their brand names. 8090% of the value of the Coca-Cola
company lies in its ownership of the name ‘Coca-Cola’.¹4 What does that mean?
It is of course complicated, but one thing it means is that if Coca Cola had to
change the name of its core product, then the value of the company as a whole
would decline dramatically. What’s important for our purposes is this: in a
scenario where the company was not allowed to put words ‘Coca-Cola’ on their
product, people’s propensity for buying and consuming the product would
decline. This proves that choice of lexical item matters. A proponent of
Always-Expand wouldn’t be able to convince Coca-Cola executives that the
name of their product is irrelevant.
• Names of children: That words’ lexical properties affect people in interesting
ways is shown by a study on how political affiliation influences the way parents
name their children. As surprising as it might (or, on further reflection, might
not) seem, there is a correlation between what a child is named and the political
affiliation of the parents who name it. In particular, a study suggested that
parents in liberal neighbourhoods are more likely to opt for ‘soft’ letters in
naming their child, such as ‘l’s and ‘m’s, while conservative people are more
likely to opt for harder sounds like ‘k’ or ‘t’. Thus baby Liam is more likely to be
the product of liberals while Kurt might follow in his parents’ footsteps and
become conservative.¹5
• The kind of signalling that is involved in name choices is, again, not about the
meaning of the name (or the meaning of sentences containing the name). It is
about triggering certain kinds of lexical effects and what the study shows is that
parents’ choices are guided by lexical effects even when they are not aware of it.
• Finally, some of the debate over the term ‘marriage’ illustrates the point. The
word ‘marriage’ has a certain effect on people and in the debate over same-sex
marriage it was important for proponents that the lexical item ‘marriage’ was
used about their relationship. To see that, note that the following wouldn’t
suffice to meet the demands of all proponents of same-sex marriage: a proposal
to introduce another term—say, ‘zwagglebuggle’—that denotes the same rights
and obligations as ‘marriage’ and same-sex couples could say that they were
‘zwagglebuggled’, but weren’t entitled to use the term ‘marriage’ about their
relationship. One reason why some proponents of same-sex marriage would
¹4 The economist Aswath Damodaran gives an analysis of the value of the Coca Cola brand name in a
blog post at http://aswathdamodaran.blogspot.com/2013/10/the-brand-name-advantage-valuable.html
¹5 https://www.livescience.com/37196-politics-baby-names.html
 

 144
reject this is that the lexical item ‘marriage’ has important cognitive and
non-cognitive effects and those are important in the debate over ‘same-sex
marriage’. The aim is, at least in part, to change of meaning of ‘marriage’.¹6,¹7
These are not isolated examples. As Chalmers point out:
Ideal agents might be unaffected by which terms are used for which concepts, but for nonideal
agents such as ourselves, the accepted meaning for a key term will make a difference to which
concepts are highlighted, which questions can easily be raised, and which associations and
inferences are naturally made. (Chalmers 2011: 542)
Many words have a massive effect in social, political, legal, medical, and interpersonal
contexts. We have no reason to think theoretical contexts are immune to
these kinds of effects. In cases where preservation of lexical effects are important,
amelioration will involve changing the meaning of the current word, not introducing
a new word. I think lexical effects are ubiquitous and of enormous importance to
communication. They are poorly understood and under-investigated (chapter 11 of
my (2018) Fixing Language provides the beginning of a theory).

In reply to Objection (4), I outlined an account of topic continuity across semantic
changes. I’ll use ‘freedom’ as an example. Suppose that at time t ‘freedom’ denotes a
certain property, P. Then a semantic change happens, and as a result, at time t1,
‘freedom’ denotes a different property, P*. This does not prevent there from being
continuity of topic in uses of ‘freedom’ at t and t1. Speakers who, at t, utter ‘Freedom
is G’ and speakers who, at t1, utter ‘freedom is G’ can say the same thing. They can all
be talking about freedom and say about it that it is G. The topic—freedom—can be
preserved through semantic changes. That is an important kind of continuity in
discourse. This continuity is why we can say about speakers at t and t1 that they are
trying to answer the same questions and it’s what underpins their agreement. Now
suppose we left the word ‘freedom’ behind and instead introduced indefinitely many
new words ‘barakuns’,‘hostomas’, ‘notacabil’, etc., for each new meaning. In that case
we would lose an important marker of discourse continuity. The connection to
previous discourse would disappear. Continuity of lexical item is an important
marker of topic continuity.
In response to what I said above, a proponent of Always-Expand could say:
You say continuity of lexical item is important, but is it essential? It might be no more than a
contingent heuristic—useful for restricted agents like humans, but in principle dispensable.
Ideally we should just name all the different properties in the freedom neighborhood, and then
some of these (or many of them) would constitute topic continuity. An ideal agent wouldn’t
need lexical continuity to recognize that continuity.
¹6 I’m here assuming, for illustrative purposes, that this involves a meaning change. It’s an open
question whether it does.
¹7 This is a point Chalmers agrees with: he is clear that in some—maybe many—cases, words matter (see
the discussion of ‘torture’ in his 2011). Chalmers himself isn’t a proponent of Always-Expand (his view was
introduced because parts of his view could be (ab)used by someone sympathetic to that thesis.)
 
 145
In reply, I would point out that the communicative features that are important for
non-ideal agents matter to us. Humans are very much non-ideal and lexical continuity
is what we—with our limited minds and fragile access to semantic and
communicative content—often need to track topic continuity. Maybe it’s not needed
by gods or by massively improved humans but that does not make it less important
for us (who are not gods or cognitively enhanced). Here is one way to see why we
need it: We care about inter-contextual and inter-conversational continuity. We can
individuate conversations so that they last over long time, take place in different
places, and involve broad range of people who will never know one another. People
who will never meet each other can participate in a conversation about, say, democracy
and terrorism. Technology has changed the paradigm of a conversation: it’s no
longer a group of people standing within hearing distance of each other, it is, rather,
people transmitting data across the internet to people they might never encounter.
Since words don’t come with little definitions attached or lines that mark topic
continuity, we often have to use lexical continuity as markers of topic continuity.
What ties conversations about democracy or terrorism together is often ‘democracy’
and ‘terrorism’. If someone started using ‘swugleding’ for an ameliorated meaning of
‘terrorism’, that would most likely fail to connect to the continuous conversations
about freedom. There are millions of existing tokens of ‘terrorism’ and the best way
for you to connect to those is to use ‘terrorism’. ‘Swugleding’ likely won’t do the work,
no matter how carefully introduced. Even ‘terrorism*’ will most likely fail because
hardly anyone will have access to the meaning of the ‘*’.¹8
To see what I have in mind, consider again the subscript strategy. It start with
freedom and then finds properties in the vicinity (or neighbourhood) of it. The
subscript strategy presupposes that there is a freedom cluster. It presupposes that
some properties are within the freedom cluster and other properties are not. For
example, the property of being one of my eyes isn’t in the freedom cluster (speaking
in the subscript lingo: it’s not a candidate for being one of ‘freedom1’, ‘freedom2’,
etc.). That’s because it’s not one of the properties in the neighbourhood of freedom.
The metaphors of ‘neighbourhood’ and ‘clusters’ play important roles in the description
just given and we need an account of what demarcates the clusters or neighbourhoods.
I tacitly introduced such a criterion (in connection with the example of
freedom): it has to be appropriately/relevantly related to freedom (without a subscript).
We have no other place to start. When theorizing we start with freedom (or,
more generally, one of the non-subscripted lexical elements) and then we find
properties that are related to it. If that’s the general strategy, we need ‘freedom’
simpliciter as the anchor point for amelioration. It is what topic continuity (being
about freedom) is measured relative to. If something like that is right, then an appeal
¹8 Note: I am not saying that it is always important to preserve a lexical item. The claim is that lexical
preservation often matters.
 

 
146
to freedom simpliciter might be theoretically indispensable if you want to preserve
topic continuity.¹?,²°

According to many views of social ontology, language plays an important role in the
creation and preservations of social facts.²¹ There isn’t much agreement on just what
that role is, but there is fairly broad agreement that it plays a role. Much here is going
to depend on the exact role language plays and which part of language is most
important, and settling these issues goes beyond the scope of this chapter. With all
those reservations in place, there is an important conditional claim:
Possible Connection between Lexical Items and Social Facts: If lexical items play
some role in the creation and preservation of social facts, then changing the
meaning of a lexical item might contribute to a change in social reality.
Illustration: Suppose a term like ‘family’ plays a role in creating and sustaining the
social category of families. If so, then improving the meaning of ‘family’ can be
contribute to a change and maybe also an improvement in that part of social reality—
it can change/ameliorate the social category of families. Suppose, instead, we introduce
a new term, ‘scramies’ with the improved meaning. That might not have the
same effect.
This point is made with a lot of ‘might’s and ‘maybe’s. We don’t yet know enough
about the role of language (and expressions in particular) to make confident claims
here. It’s an important issue that conceptual engineers should explore further.
Objection (6): Why Think the Importance of the Revisionist Project
Undermines the Importance of the Descriptive Project? Why Think There’s
a Tension between the Two Approaches? Aren’t They Complementary?
The Objection: In section I of this chapter I described a tension between a descriptive
project and a revisionist project. But why aren’t they complementary projects? You
can do some describing and some amelioration, and these go hand in hand. Moreover,
I have described conceptual engineering as a two-step process: first describe
deficiencies and then develop ameliorative strategies. That first step is at least in part
descriptive,²² so the revisionist project presupposes the descriptive project. Setting it
up as a conflict is misleading.
Before replying to this objection, I should note that it contains an important
element of truth. There’s no inconsistency between the two projects; they could
¹? None of this is to deny that you could just ignore topic continuity and describe properties independently
of what ‘clusters’ or ‘neighbourhoods’ they belong to. Nor is it to deny that having created the cluster,
we couldn’t then shift emphasis to one of the others (i.e., the anchoring doesn’t have to be continuous).
²° See chapter 17 of my (2018) Fixing Language for more on this line of thought.
²¹ For a paradigm of the kind of view I have in mind, see Searle 1995: chapter 3. See also section 4.6 of
Brian Epstein’s Stanford Encyclopedia entry on Social Ontology (Epstein 2018)) and the references in that
entry.
²² That it’s a defect is of course a normative judgement, but presumably that judgement relies on a
description of what it is like (or what properties it has).
 
 
 
 147
complement each other. Despite this, I think it’s accurate to talk in somewhat loose
terms about a ‘tension’ between the two projects. Here is why:
Reply 1: The goals and purposes you have when doing research guides much of what
you do. For example, consider someone interested in how cells grow and divide as a
purely intrinsically interesting topic. Their research will be guided in very different
directions compared to someone who is interested in understanding cancer and is
doing the research in order to develop a cure for it. There’s obviously no incompatibility
between the two projects, but the focus will be immensely influenced by the
goal. For a closer-to-home example, consider someone interested simply in the
syntax and semantics of ‘true’ compared to someone interested in ‘true’ because of
the semantic paradoxes. This will give rise to very different research projects and
there’s a tension in this sense: a lot of what the one is doing will be irrelevant to
the other because their research direction and priorities will differ significantly.
Or compare the following two: on the one hand, someone interested in the semantics
and syntax of terms like ‘woman’, and on the other, someone like Sally Haslanger
who is interested in how such terms ought to be used to classify group for political
purposes. Again, there’s no incompatibility between the two projects, but the differences
in goals will lead to difference in priorities and this again will shape radically
different research projects. However, none of this is to say that these differences in
goals, priorities and direction imply that the ameliorator shouldn’t in part be guided
and restrained by descriptive insights.
Reply 2: What is impossible—or at least incompatible with the Master Argument—is
to be a ‘pure’ descriptivist. A descriptivist who claims to have no interest in or need
for conceptual engineering shows a lack of understanding of the Master Argument.
A corollary of that argument is that all the concepts involved in describing conceptual
engineering should themselves be subject to critical assessment. So should the
concepts used to describe and execute the descriptive project. We have to assess and
improve on the following concepts: ‘concept’, ‘conceptual defect’, ‘descriptive work’,
and so on. In other words, the very terminology with which you engage in the
descriptive project is itself subject to assessment. So a ‘pure’ descriptivist would
show a lack of understanding for the need to assess and improve on the concepts
used to engage in the descriptive project (and even the concepts involved in describing
the contrast between the descriptive and the ameliorative project).
Objection (7): If We Are to Engage in Conceptual Engineering, Don’tWe Have
to Assume that Meaning Assignments Are Within Our Control? If They Are
Out of Our Control, How Can We Meaningfully Engage in Conceptual
Engineering?
The objection: Setting up the objection will require slightly more work than in the
previous cases. Here is the basic thought: Conceptual engineering, I claim, involves
identifying representational defects and then finding ameliorative strategies. This
seems to imply (or presuppose) that successful conceptual engineering requires that
meaning assignments are in large part within our control. Why construct ameliorative
strategies if we can’t implement them?
 
148
One reason I take this objection very seriously is that I think meaning assignments
are in large part incomprehensible and outside human control. In what follows I first
explain why, and then reply to the objection.
Background for the objection: The metasemantic facts are out of control and inscrutable.
I focus on what two broad kinds of metasemantic theories tell us about meaning
determination: externalist theories and internalist theories. On the standard externalist
story, content determining factors include:
• Introductory events that typically happened long time ago and were performed
by people we don’t know anything about. The introductory events will be of two
broad kinds: demonstrative (“let ‘F’ denote those kinds of things”) or descriptive
(“let ‘F’ denote the things that are G”). Note that if this is right, then in many
cases the facts surrounding these introductory events will be unknowable to us.
We have no way to access what happened: there will be no written record and,
absent a time machine, we can’t know what happened. We don’t know what was
pointed to and we don’t know the details of the descriptions used. Moreover, we
don’t know the motivations for these introductions.
• Externalist theories also appeal to chains of reference transition. In such communicative
chains, expressions are ‘passed along’ from one speaker to another
and there is some kind of reference-preserving element in the communicative
chain. Sometimes those chains are not reference preserving; in such cases, we get
reference shifts.
• Other externalists, such as Timothy Williamson, talk more generally of meaning
as supervening on use patterns over time where this connection between use and
meaning (or reference) is chaotic in the sense that there’s no algorithmthat takes
us from use patterns to meanings. The connection is too complex—indeed it
might be in principle too complex for humans to grasp. We can’t know about all
the particular uses, and even if we did know about them, the way in which
meaning is generated by such use is too complex for the human mind to grasp.
An important feature of these kinds of views is that we are in large part not in
control of the reference determining process. We’re not, for example, in control of
what happened far into the past, we’re not in control of what happened in the
transition periods. In general, no one is in control of the total pattern of use. Nor
are we in control of the supervenience relation that takes us from complex usepatterns
to meanings.
It’s tempting to think that if your metasemantics is more internalistic, meanings
would be more within our control and so meaning change would be easier. Burgess
and Plunkett, for example, say:
The textbook externalist thinks that our social and natural environments serve as heavy
anchors, so to speak, for the interpretation of our individual thought and talk. The internalist,
by contrast, grants us a greater degree of conceptual autonomy. One salient upshot of this
disagreement is that effecting conceptual change looks comparatively easy from an internalist
perspective. We can revise, eliminate, or replace our concepts without worrying about what the
experts are up to, or what happens to be coming out of our taps.
(Burgess and Plunkett 2013: 1096)
 
149
I agree with one part of this: from the point of view of an internalist theory, meaning
change and revision is possible. That’s all that’s needed to support the second
premise in the Master Argument. However, and this will be relevant later,
I disagree with the claim that internalism, as such, puts us more in control of these
changes. Internalism is a supervenience claim: the extensions and intensions of
expressions supervene on individuals (and then lots of bells and whistles to
elaborate on this in various ways, but the bells and whistles don’t matter right
now). Suppose the meaning of my words supervene in that way on me. Note first
that this is compatible with the meanings and extensions supervening on features of
me that I have no control over. It’s also compatible with it being unsettled and
unstable what combination of internal features ground reference. So there’s just no
step from Internalism to control. Moreover, even if meaning supervenes on something
internal that I have control over, control doesn’t follow: it could supervene on
something we could control, but the determination relation from the supervenience
base to meanings/extension could still be out of our control. For example, even if
there’s supervenience on what we want or intend or decide, the supervenience
relation doesn’t have to make it the case that semantic values are what we intend
for them to be, what we want them to be, or what we agree on them to be (for all
we know, it could be a total mess or get us to the opposite of what we want, intend,
or decide).
In sum: both externalist and internalist theories makes meaning change possible,
though both of those theories make it hard to see how this is a process we can be in
control of. This is why Objection (7) is pressing.
Reply: In summary form, my reply is that conceptual engineering shares this feature
with most normative theorizing. On the view I defend, the tools we think with are
often defective, but there’s very little we can do about it. We can talk and think
about it, but doing so has hardly any effect. Compare that to me talking to you
about crime in Baltimore, poverty in Bangladesh, or the Trump presidency. Such
talk is unlikely to have any effect on what happens in Baltimore, Bangladesh, or
Trump. The ineffectiveness of talking is an almost universal aspect of large-scale
normative reflections. Anyone who spends time thinking and talking about largescale
normative matters should do so without holding out too much hope that their
talking and thinking will have significant or predictable effects on the relevant
aspect of the world. If you think your views and theories about crime in Baltimore,
poverty in Bangladesh, or the Trump presidency will have a significant or predictable
effect on either, you’re extremely likely to be disappointed (and to end up
feeling you’ve wasted the part of your life that has been devoted to these issues).
There are of course small-scale local issues where normative reflections will have a
direct effect. If I think my daughter shouldn’t have an ice cream, then, at least in a
few cases, the result will be that she eats no ice cream. Moving to slightly largerscale
issues—say speed bumps in the street where I live—my opinions, views, and
pleadings will have tiny effects, but already these effects will be fairly marginal,
unsystematic, and unpredictable (as I’ve discovered). On the view proposed in
Cappelen (2018), changes in extensions and intensions of words are far over on
the large-scale and unpredictable side. Much closer to crime in Baltimore than to
 
150
speed bumps in Sofies Gate.²³ So, in sum, the worry that I’ve painted too bleak a
picture of the prospects of conceptual engineering simply fails to take into account
the relevant comparison class. What I say about conceptual engineering shouldn’t be
surprising and doesn’t make the activity of trying to engineer concepts much different
from a wide range of other human efforts to think about how things should be.
Conclusion
The Master Argument provides a general argument for the importance of conceptual
engineering. It has nothing to say about particular deficiencies or ameliorative
strategies. As a heuristic it’s useful to think of conceptual engineering as having
two parts: the general theory and the specific applications. We should expect a twoway
interaction: the general theory will inform the specific cases and the specific cases
will inform the general theory. It should also be clear from the discussion above that
there can be many frameworks for thinking about conceptual engineering. What one
takes conceptual engineering to be (when thinking about both the general theory and
specific cases) will be shaped in large part by what one takes meanings and concepts
to be, what one assumes about metasemantics, and what one takes to be conceptual
defects and virtues. One advantage of the Master Argument is that it is neutral on
those questions and so can provide a kind of common ground for all those who see
conceptual engineering as central to philosophy.
Acknowledgements
Much of the discussion in this chapter draws on Cappelen (2018). This can be seen as an
elaboration of an argument in section II of that book, but this is the more refined version of the
argument (better than the one I present there). I presented this chapter as a paper at the
Philosophy Mountain Workshop in Telluride and at the Arché Conceptual Engineering in St
Andrews. I’m grateful to all the participants for helpful discussions and in particular to Alexis
Burgess, David Plunkett, Kevin Scharp, and Seth Yalcin for detailed comments.
